
1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Jun 21;15(6):e1007877. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007877.
eCollection 2019 Jun.

The YIN and YANG of lipoproteins in developing and preventing infectious
arthritis by Staphylococcus aureus.

Mohammad M(1), Nguyen MT(2), Engdahl C(1), Na M(1), Jarneborn A(1)(3), Hu
Z(1)(4), Karlsson A(1), Pullerits R(1)(3)(5), Ali A(1), Götz F(2), Jin T(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, Institute of Medicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbial Genetics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg,
Sweden.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou 
Medical University, Guiyang, China.
(5)Department of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Rapid bone destruction often leads to permanent joint dysfunction in patients
with septic arthritis, which is mainly caused by Staphylococcus aureus (S.
aureus). Staphylococcal cell wall components are known to induce joint
inflammation and bone destruction. Here, we show that a single intra-articular
injection of S. aureus lipoproteins (Lpps) into mouse knee joints induced chronic
destructive macroscopic arthritis through TLR2. Arthritis was characterized by
rapid infiltration of neutrophils and monocytes. The arthritogenic effect was
mediated mainly by macrophages/monocytes and partially via TNF-α but not by
neutrophils. Surprisingly, a S. aureus mutant lacking Lpp diacylglyceryl
transferase (lgt) caused more severe joint inflammation, which coincided with
higher bacterial loads of the lgt mutant in local joints than those of its
parental strain. Coinjection of pathogenic S. aureus LS-1 with staphylococcal
Lpps into mouse knee joints caused improved bacterial elimination and diminished 
bone erosion. The protective effect of the Lpps was mediated by their lipid
moiety and was fully dependent on TLR2 and neutrophils. The blocking of CXCR2 on 
neutrophils resulted in total abrogation of the protective effect of the Lpps.
Our data demonstrate that S. aureus Lpps elicit innate immune responses,
resulting in a double-edged effect. On the one hand, staphylococcal Lpps boost
septic arthritis. On the other hand, Lpps act as adjuvants and activate innate
immunity, which could be useful for combating infections with multiple
drug-resistant strains.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007877 
PMCID: PMC6608979
PMID: 31226163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

