
1. ISME J. 2019 Oct;13(10):2536-2550. doi: 10.1038/s41396-019-0455-3. Epub 2019 Jun 
21.

Sulfur metabolites that facilitate oceanic phytoplankton-bacteria carbon flux.

Landa M(1)(2), Burns AS(1)(3), Durham BP(4), Esson K(5)(6), Nowinski B(1), Sharma
S(1), Vorobev A(1)(7), Nielsen T(8), Kiene RP(5)(6), Moran MA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Sciences, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USA.
(2)Ocean Sciences Department, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, 95064,
USA.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA,
30332, USA.
(4)School of Oceanography, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98105, USA.
(5)Department of Marine Sciences, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, 36688,
USA.
(6)Dauphin Island Sea Lab, Dauphin Island, AL, 36528, USA.
(7)CEA - Institut de Biologie François Jacob, Genoscope, 2 rue Gaston Crémieux,
91057, Evry, France.
(8)DOE Joint Genome Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut Creek, CA, 94598, USA.
(9)Department of Marine Sciences, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USA. 
mmoran@uga.edu.

Unlike biologically available nitrogen and phosphorus, which are often at
limiting concentrations in surface seawater, sulfur in the form of sulfate is
plentiful and not considered to constrain marine microbial activity. Nonetheless,
in a model system in which a marine bacterium obtains all of its carbon from
co-cultured phytoplankton, bacterial gene expression suggests that at least seven
dissolved organic sulfur (DOS) metabolites support bacterial heterotrophy. These 
labile exometabolites of marine dinoflagellates and diatoms include taurine,
N-acetyltaurine, isethionate, choline-O-sulfate, cysteate,
2,3-dihydroxypropane-1-sulfonate (DHPS), and dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP).
Leveraging from the compounds identified in this model system, we assessed the
role of sulfur metabolites in the ocean carbon cycle by mining the Tara Oceans
dataset for diagnostic genes. In the 1.4 million bacterial genome equivalents
surveyed, estimates of the frequency of genomes harboring the capability for DOS 
metabolite utilization ranged broadly, from only 1 out of every 190 genomes (for 
the C2 sulfonate isethionate) to 1 out of every 5 (for the sulfonium compound
DMSP). Bacteria able to participate in DOS transformations are dominated by
Alphaproteobacteria in the surface ocean, but by SAR324, Acidimicrobiia, and
Gammaproteobacteria at mesopelagic depths, where the capability for utilization
occurs in higher frequency than in surface bacteria for more than half the sulfur
metabolites. The discovery of an abundant and diverse suite of marine bacteria
with the genetic capacity for DOS transformation argues for an important role for
sulfur metabolites in the pelagic ocean carbon cycle.

DOI: 10.1038/s41396-019-0455-3 
PMCID: PMC6776065
PMID: 31227817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

