
1. J Immunol. 2019 Aug 15;203(4):922-935. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900169. Epub 2019
Jun 24.

IL-36γ Promotes Killing of Mycobacterium tuberculosis by Macrophages via
WNT5A-Induced Noncanonical WNT Signaling.

Gao Y(1), Wen Q(1), Hu S(1), Zhou X(1), Xiong W(1), Du X(1), Zhang L(1), Fu Y(1),
Yang J(1), Zhou C(1), Zhang Z(1), Li Y(1), Liu H(1), Huang Y(1), Ma L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Immunology, School of Laboratory Medicine and
Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(2)Institute of Molecular Immunology, School of Laboratory Medicine and
Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China
maryhmz@126.com.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which primarily infects mononuclear phagocytes,
remains the leading bacterial cause of enormous morbidity and mortality because
of bacterial infections in humans throughout the world. The IL-1 family of
cytokines is critical for host resistance to M. tuberculosis As a newly
discovered subgroup of the IL-1 family, although IL-36 cytokines have been proven
to play roles in protection against M. tuberculosis infection, the antibacterial 
mechanisms are poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrated that IL-36γ
conferred to human monocyte-derived macrophages bacterial resistance through
activation of autophagy as well as induction of WNT5A, a reported downstream
effector of IL-1 involved in several inflammatory diseases. Further studies
showed that WNT5A could enhance autophagy of monocyte-derived macrophages by
inducing cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression and in turn decrease phosphorylation
of AKT/mTOR via noncanonical WNT signaling. Consistently, the underlying
molecular mechanisms of IL-36γ function are also mediated by the COX-2/AKT/mTOR
signaling axis. Altogether, our findings reveal a novel activity for IL-36γ as an
inducer of autophagy, which represents a critical inflammatory cytokine that
control the outcome of M. tuberculosis infection in human macrophages.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900169 
PMCID: PMC6680068
PMID: 31235551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

