
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2019 Jul 19;14(7):1564-1572. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.9b00307. Epub
2019 Jun 17.

A Highly Versatile Expression System for the Production of Multiply
Phosphorylated Proteins.

Zhu P(1), Gafken PR(2), Mehl RA(1), Cooley RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oregon State University , Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 2011
Agricultural and Life Sciences , Corvallis , Oregon 97331 , United States.
(2)Proteomics Shared Resource , Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center , Seattle 
, Washington 98109 , United States.

Genetic Code Expansion (GCE) can use TAG stop codons to guide site-specific
incorporation of phosphoserine (pSer) into proteins. To eliminate prematurely
truncated peptides, improve yields, and enhance the production of
multiphosphorylated proteins, Release Factor 1 (RF1)-deficient expression hosts
were developed, yet these grew slowly and their use was associated with extensive
misincorporation of natural amino acids instead of pSer. Here, we merge a healthy
RF1-deficient E. coli cell line with a high-efficiency pSer GCE translation
system to produce a versatile pSer GCE platform in which only trace
misincorporation of natural amino acids is detected even when five phosphoserines
were introduced into one protein. Approximately 400 and 200 mg of singly and
doubly phosphorylated GFP per liter of culture were obtained. Importantly, the
lack of truncated protein permits expression of oligomeric proteins and the use
of N-terminal solubility-enhancing proteins to aid phospho-protein expression and
purification. To illustrate the enhanced utility of this system, we produce
doubly phosphorylated STING (Stimulator of Interferon Genes), as well as triply
phosphorylated BAD (Bcl2-associated agonist of cell death) complexed with 14-3-3,
in quantity, purity, and homogeneity sufficient for structural biology
applications. We anticipate that the facile access to phosphoproteins enabled by 
this system, which we call pSer-3.1G, will expand studies of the
phospho-proteome.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.9b00307 
PMCID: PMC7737670
PMID: 31243963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

