
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Jun 6;10:1126. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01126. eCollection
2019.

α-GalCer and iNKT Cell-Based Cancer Immunotherapy: Realizing the Therapeutic
Potentials.

Zhang Y(1), Springfield R(1), Chen S(1), Li X(1), Feng X(1), Moshirian R(1), Yang
R(1), Yuan W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, United States.

NKT cells are CD1d-restricted innate-like T cells expressing both T cell receptor
and NK cell markers. The major group of NKT cells in both human and mice is the
invariant NKT (iNKT) cells and the best-known function of iNKT cells is their
potent anti-tumor function in mice. Since its discovery 25 years ago, the
prototype ligand of iNKT cells, α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) has been used in 
over 30 anti-tumor clinical trials with mostly suboptimal outcomes. To realize
its therapeutic potential, numerous preclinical models have been developed to
optimize the scheme and strategies for α-GalCer-based cancer immunotherapies.
Nevertheless, since there is no standard protocol for α-GalCer delivery, we
reviewed the preclinical studies with a focus on B16 melanoma model in the goal
of identifying the best treatment schemes for α-GalCer treatment. We then
reviewed the current progress in developing more clinically relevant mouse models
for these preclinical studies, most notably the generation of new mouse models
with a humanized CD1d/iNKT cell system. With ever-emerging novel iNKT cell
ligands, invention of novel α-GalCer delivery strategies and significantly
improved preclinical models for optimizing these new strategies, one can be
hopeful that the full potential of anti-tumor potential for α-GalCer will be
realized in the not too distant future.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01126 
PMCID: PMC6562299
PMID: 31244823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

