
1. Tumour Biol. 2019 Jun;41(6):1010428319858885. doi: 10.1177/1010428319858885.

Utility of G protein-coupled receptor 35 expression for predicting outcome in
colon cancer.

Ali H(1)(2)(3), AbdelMageed M(1)(2)(3), Olsson L(1), Israelsson A(1), Lindmark
G(4), Hammarström ML(1), Hammarström S(1), Sitohy B(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Infection and Immunology, Department of Clinical Microbiology,
Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)2 Division of Oncology, Department of Radiation Sciences, Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden.
(3)3 Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Zagazig University,
Zagazig, Egypt.
(4)4 Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Helsingborg, Sweden.

The utility of mRNA and protein determinations of G protein-coupled receptor 35, 
that is, GPR35a (GPR35 V1) and GPR35b (GPR35 V2/3), as indicators of outcome for 
colon cancer patients after curative surgery was investigated. Expression levels 
of V1 and V2/3 GPR35, carcinoembryonic antigen and CXCL17 mRNAs were assessed in 
primary tumours and regional lymph nodes of 121 colon cancer patients (stage
I-IV), colon cancer cell lines and control colon epithelial cells using real-time
quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Expression of G
protein-coupled receptor 35 was investigated by two-colour immunohistochemistry
and immunomorphometry. GPR35 V2/3 mRNA, but not V1 mRNA, was expressed in colon
cancer cell lines, primary colon tumours and control colon epithelial cells.
Haematoxylin and eosin positive (H&E(+)), but not H&E(-), lymph nodes expressed
high levels of GPR35 V2/3 mRNA (P<0.0001). GPR35b and carcinoembryonic antigen
proteins were simultaneously expressed in many colon cancer tumour cells.
Kaplan-Meier and hazard ratio analysis revealed that patients with lymph nodes
expressing high levels of GPR35 V2/3 mRNA and, in particular, in the group of
patients with lymph nodes also expressing carcinoembryonic antigen mRNA, had a
short disease-free survival time, 67 months versus 122 months at 12-year
follow-up (difference: 55 months, P = 0.001; hazard ratio: 3.6, P = 0.002). In
conclusion, high level expression of G protein-coupled receptor 35 V2/3 mRNA in
regional lymph nodes of colon cancer patients is a sign of poor prognosis.

DOI: 10.1177/1010428319858885 
PMID: 31250711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

