
1. J Dairy Sci. 2019 Sep;102(9):7684-7696. doi: 10.3168/jds.2019-16332. Epub 2019
Jun 27.

Transcriptomic responses of Caco-2 cells to Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and
Lactobacillus plantarum J26 against oxidative stress.

Hou Y(1), Li X(1), Liu X(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang W(1), Man C(2), Jiang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Dairy Science, Ministry of Education, Department of Food
Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, China, 150030.
(2)Key Laboratory of Dairy Science, Ministry of Education, Department of Food
Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, China, 150030. Electronic
address: mcxwh2006@qq.com.
(3)Key Laboratory of Dairy Science, Ministry of Education, Department of Food
Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, China, 150030. Electronic
address: yujun_jiang@163.com.

Oxidative stress is the basic reason for aging and age-related diseases. In this 
study, we investigated the protective effect of 2 strains of lactic acid bacteria
(LAB), Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and L. plantarum J26, against oxidative stress 
in Caco-2 cells, and gave an overview of the mechanisms of lactic acid bacteria
antioxidant activity using digital gene expression profiling. The 2 LAB strains
provided significant protection against hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)-induced
reduction in superoxide dismutase activity and increase in glutathione peroxidase
activity in Caco-2 cells. However, inactive bacteria had little effect on
alleviating oxidation stress in Caco-2 cells. Eight genes related to oxidative
stress-FOSB, TNF, PPP1R15A, NUAK2, ATF3, TNFAIP3, EGR2, and FBN2-were
significantly upregulated in H2O2-induced Caco-2 cells compared with untreated
Caco-2 cells. After incubation of the H2O2-induced Caco-2 cells with L. rhamnosus
GG and L. plantarum J26, 5 genes (TNF, EGR2, NUAK2, FBN2, and TNFAIP3) and 2
genes (NUAK2 and FBN2) were downregulated, respectively. In addition, the Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes indicated that some signaling pathways
associated with inflammation, immune response, and apoptosis, such as Janus
kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (Jak-STAT),
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), nuclear factor-κB, and tumor necrosis
factor, were all negatively modulated by the 2 strains, especially L. rhamnosus
GG. In this paper, we reveal the mechanism of LAB in relieving oxidative stress
and provide a theoretical basis for the rapid screening and evaluation of new LAB
resources.

Copyright © 2019 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2019-16332 
PMID: 31255276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

