
1. Chembiochem. 2019 Oct 15;20(20):2653-2665. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201900272. Epub 2019
Aug 22.

Characterization of Gene Circuit Parts Based on Multiobjective Optimization by
Using Standard Calibrated Measurements.

Boada Y(1)(2), Vignoni A(1), Alarcon-Ruiz I(1)(3), Andreu-Vilarroig C(4),
Monfort-Llorens R(1)(4), Requena A(1)(3), Picó J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Synthetic Biology and Biosystems Control Lab, I.U. de Automática e Informática
Industrial (ai2), Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Camino de Vera S/N, 46022,
Valencia, Spain.
(2)Centro Universitario EDEM, Escuela de Empresarios, La Marina de València,
Muelle de la Aduana S/N, 46024, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Escuela Tècnica Superior de Ingeniería Agronómica y del Medio Natural,
Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Camino de Vera S/N, 46022, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería Industrial, Universitat Politècnica de 
Valencia, Camino de Vera S/N, 46022, Valencia, Spain.

Standardization and characterization of biological parts is necessary for the
further development of bottom-up synthetic biology. Herein, an easy-to-use
methodology that embodies both a calibration procedure and a multiobjective
optimization approach is proposed to characterize biological parts. The
calibration procedure generates values for specific fluorescence per cell
expressed as standard units of molecules of equivalent fluorescein per particle. 
The use of absolute standard units enhances the characterization of model
parameters for biological parts by bringing measurements and estimations results 
from different sources into a common domain, so they can be integrated and
compared faithfully. The multiobjective optimization procedure exploits these
concepts by estimating the values of the model parameters, which represent
biological parts of interest, while considering a varied range of experimental
and circuit contexts. Thus, multiobjective optimization provides a robust
characterization of them. The proposed calibration and characterization
methodology can be used as a guide for good practices in dry and wet
laboratories; thus allowing not only portability between models, but is also
useful for generating libraries of tested and well-characterized biological
parts.

© 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201900272 
PMID: 31269324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

