
1. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2019 Aug;38(4):162-170. doi:
10.1089/mab.2019.0016. Epub 2019 Jul 16.

A Monoclonal Antibody to M-Phase Phosphoprotein 1/Kinesin-Like Protein KIF20B.

Fritzler MJ(1), Brown RD(2), Zhang M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Medicine, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)2Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria,
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.

Kinesin-like protein KIF20B, originally named M-phase phosphoprotein 1 (MPP1), is
a plus-end-directed kinesin-related protein that exhibits in vitro
microtubule-binding and -bundling properties as well as microtubule-stimulated
ATPase activity. It has been characterized as a slow molecular motor that moves
toward the plus-end of microtubules. Human autoantibodies directed against KIF20B
have been described in up to 25% of patients with idiopathic ataxia and less
commonly in other neuropathies and autoinflammatory conditions. One of the
limitations of research into the structure and function of KIF20B has been a
reliable monoclonal antibody that can be used in a variety of applications. To
establish a reference standard for anti-KIF20B immunoassays and facilitate
studies on the role of KIF20B in developmental cell biology, we developed an IgG1
monoclonal antibody, 10C7, which reacts with the cognate KIF20B protein in
Western immunoblots and in addressable laser bead immunoassays. In HEp2 cells,
leptomeningeal pericytes, and transfected HEK293T cells, indirect
immunofluorescence studies showed that reactivity was mainly localized to a
proportion of interphase nuclei, but during metaphase, it was redistributed
throughout the cytoplasm and perichromatin mass. Later in telophase/anaphase,
KIF20B was localized to the stem body and midzone of the midbody. 10C7 also
showed remarkable staining of a subset of cells in the cerebellum, ovary, and
testis tissues. KIF20B was shown to have extensive coiled-coil domains. The
monoclonal antibody, 10C7, will be of value to diagnostic laboratory scientists
interested in having a reliable reference standard for anti-KIF20B immunoassays
as well as cell, molecular, and developmental biology researchers.

DOI: 10.1089/mab.2019.0016 
PMCID: PMC6709729
PMID: 31260385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

