
1. Cancer Med. 2019 Aug;8(10):4928-4937. doi: 10.1002/cam4.2390. Epub 2019 Jul 5.

Inverse association of Helicobacter pylori cagPAI genotypes with risk of cardia
and non-cardia gastric adenocarcinoma.

Bakhti SZ(1), Latifi-Navid S(1), Zahri S(1), Yazdanbod A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Mohaghegh Ardabili, 
Ardabil, Iran.
(2)Digestive Diseases Research Center, Ardabil University of Medical Sciences,
Ardabil, Iran.

Iran is a high-risk country for cardia gastric adenocarcinoma (CGA) in Central
Asia, with an incidence rate five times the average global rate, and shows a high
infection rate for Helicobacter pylori (69%). The aim was to examine the
associations of multiple H. pylori cagPAI genotypes (ie cagH, cagL, cagG, and
orf17) with the risk of CGA, non-CGA, and different histological types of GA in
Iran. A large number of H. pylori strains (N = 336) were successfully cultured
and genotyped. Histopathological evaluations were performed. The analysis showed 
an inverse association between the cagH+ genotype and the risk of CGA and
intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma (IGA) (adjusted ORs; 0.312 and 0.283,
respectively), where the controls were nontumors. The orf17+ genotype decreased
the risk of non-CGA and diffuse-type gastric adenocarcinoma (DGA)(adjusted ORs;
0.310 and 0.356, respectively). When the controls were those with nonatrophic
gastritis, the cagG+ genotype was negatively associated with the risk of CGA,
non-CGA, IGA, and DGA (adjusted ORs; 0.324, 0.366, 0.306, and 0.303,
respectively). We did not find such a significant association for the cagL+
genotype in multiple logistic regression analysis. Combination of the vacA c2 and
cagPAI genotypes further decreased the risk estimates for GAs. This study showed 
the reverse association of H. pylori cagPAI genotypes-cagH+ and cagG+ -with the
risk of CGA in male patients aged ≥ 55 in Iran. Presence of the vacA c2 genotype 
in combination with cagPAI genotypes showed strong inverse associations with the 
risk of CGA and non-CGA. These findings may reveal a coordinated relationship
between the vacA c2 and cagPAI genotypes.

© 2019 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.2390 
PMCID: PMC6712521
PMID: 31273955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

