
1. J Environ Sci (China). 2019 Oct;84:112-121. doi: 10.1016/j.jes.2019.04.021. Epub 
2019 Apr 30.

Importance of nutrient availability for soluble microbial products formation
during a famine period of activated sludge: Evidence from multiple analyses.

Maqbool T(1), Cho J(1), Hur J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environment and Energy, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, South
Korea.
(2)Department of Environment and Energy, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, South
Korea. Electronic address: jinhur@sejong.ac.kr.

Much remains unknown about compositional variations in soluble microbial products
(SMP) with the shift of the substrate condition from a feast to a famine phase in
biological treatment systems. This study demonstrated that the formation of SMP
could be suppressed by up to 75% during the famine phase with the addition of
essential nutrients. In contrast, presence of electron acceptor did not play any 
significant role during the stress condition, showing the similar amounts of SMP 
(r = 0.98, p < 0.05) formation between the bioreactors supplied with air and N2. 
The SMP formed in the famine phase was more bio-refractory in the famine versus
the feast phase with a linear correlation shown between the production and their 
aromatic structures in the composition (R2 > 0.95). The fluorescence
excitation-emission matrix coupled with parallel factor analysis (EEM-PARAFAC)
revealed the presence of four different fluorescent components, including two
protein-like (C1 and C4), fulvic-like (C2), and humic-like (C3) components, in
the SMP and bEPS formed at different conditions. Both C1 and C4 showed increasing
trends (R2 > 0.95) with the length of starvation in the bioreactors without
essential nutrients. Nutrient availability was found to be a key factor to quench
the production of large-sized biopolymers. This study provides a wealth of
information on operation conditions of activated sludge treatment systems to
minimize large sized SMP molecules (particularly proteins), which typically exert
many environmental concerns to effluent organic matter quality.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jes.2019.04.021 
PMID: 31284902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

