
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Jun 25;10:1445. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01445. eCollection
2019.

Human Skin-Derived Mast Cells Spontaneously Secrete Several Angiogenesis-Related 
Factors.

McHale C(1), Mohammed Z(1), Gomez G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC, United States.

Mast cells are classically recognized as cells that cause IgE-mediated allergic
reactions. However, their ability to store and secrete vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) suggests a role in vascular development and tumorigenesis.
The current study sought to determine if other angiogenesis-related factors, in
addition to VEGF, were also secreted by human tissue-derived mast cells. Using
proteome array analysis and ELISA, we found that human skin-derived mast cells
spontaneously secrete CXCL16, DPPIV, Endothelin-1, GM-CSF, IL-8, MCP-1, Pentraxin
3, Serpin E1, Serpin F1, TIMP-1, Thrombospondin-1, and uPA. We identified three
groups based on their dependency for stem cell factor (SCF), which is required
for mast cell survival: Endothelin-1, GM-CSF, IL-8, MCP-1, and VEGF (dependent); 
Pentraxin 3, Serpin E1, Serpin F1, TIMP-1, and Thrombospondin-1 (partly
dependent); and CXCL16, DPPIV, and uPA (independent). Crosslinking of FcεRI with 
multivalent antigen enhanced the secretion of GM-CSF, Serpin E1, IL-8, and VEGF, 
and induced Amphiregulin and MMP-8 expression. Interestingly, FcεRI signals
inhibited the spontaneous secretion of CXCL16, Endothelin-1, Serpin F1,
Thrombospondin-1, MCP-1 and Pentraxin-3. Furthermore, IL-6, which we previously
showed could induce VEGF, significantly enhanced MCP-1 secretion. Overall, this
study identified several angiogenesis-related proteins that, in addition to VEGF,
are spontaneously secreted at high concentrations from human skin-derived mast
cells. These findings provide further evidence supporting an intrinsic role for
mast cells in blood vessel formation.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01445 
PMCID: PMC6603178
PMID: 31293594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

