
1. Poult Sci. 2019 Nov 1;98(11):5949-5960. doi: 10.3382/ps/pez388.

Evaluation of the impact of in ovo administered bacteria on microbiome of chicks 
through 10 days of age.

Wilson KM(1), Rodrigues DR(1), Briggs WN(1), Duff AF(1), Chasser KM(1), Bielke
LR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 44691.

Initial inoculation and colonization of the chicken gastrointestinal tract (GIT) 
by microbiota have been suggested to have a major influence on the growth
performance and health of birds. Commercial practices in chicken production may
alter or delay microbial colonization by pioneer colonizing bacteria that can
have an impact on the development and maturation of the GIT and intestinal
microflora. The objective of this study was to compare the impact of apathogenic 
Gram-negative isolates or lactic acid bacteria (LAB) as pioneer colonizers on the
microbiome at the day of hatch (DOH) and evaluate the influence through 10 D of
age on ceca. At 18 embryonic days (E), the amnion of embryos was inoculated with 
either saline (S), approximately 102 CFU of LAB (L), Citrobacter freundii (C), or
Citrobacter species (C2). Once DNA was isolated from mucosal and digesta
contents, samples underwent 2 × 300 paired-end Illumina MiSeq library preparation
for microbiome analysis. An increased abundance of Lactobacillaceae family and
Lactobacillus genus was observed in the L group at DOH (P < 0.05), whereas the
abundance of Enterococcaceae and Enterococcus was numerically decreased. While
Lactobacillus salivarius was one of the pioneer colonizers in the L group at 18E,
the population decreased by 10 D (39.59 to 0.09%) and replaced with a population 
of undefined Lactobacillus (10.36%) and Lactobacillus reuteri (3.63%). Results
suggest that L treatment may have accelerated a mature microbiota.
Enterobacteriaceae was the dominant family (57.44%) in C group at DOH (P < 0.05).
The C2 group only showed some abundance of the C2 species (7.92%) at DOH but had 
the highest overall abundance of undefined Lactobacillus in the ceca by 10 D
(25.28%). Taken together, different isolates provided in ovo can have an impact
on the initial microbiome of the GIT, and some of these differences in ceca
remain notable at 10 D.

© 2019 Poultry Science Association Inc.

DOI: 10.3382/ps/pez388 
PMID: 31298298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

