
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2019 Sep;59(9):914-923. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201900165. Epub 2019
Jul 11.

phz1 contributes much more to phenazine-1-carboxylic acid biosynthesis than phz2 
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa rpoS mutant.

Sun L(1), Chi X(1), Feng Z(1), Wang K(1), Kai L(1), Zhang K(1), Cheng S(1), Hao
X(2), Xie W(1), Ge Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied and Environmental Microbiology, School of Life Sciences,
Ludong University, Yantai, China.
(2)Laboratory of Applied and Environmental Microbiology, Institute of Applied
Microbiology, Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Urumqi, China.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1, a common opportunistic bacterial pathogen, contains 
two phenazine-biosynthetic operons, phz1 (phzA1 B1 C1 D1 E1 F1 G1 ) and phz2
(phzA2 B2 C2 D2 E2 F2 G2 ). Each of two operons can independently encode a set of
enzymes involving in the biosynthesis of phenazine-1-carboxylic acid. As a global
transcriptional regulator, RpoS mediates a lot of genes involving secondary
metabolites biosynthesis in many bacteria. In an other previous study, it was
reported that RpoS deficiency caused overproduction of pyocyanin, a derivative of
phenazine-1-carboxylic acid in P. aeruginosa PAO1. But it is not known how RpoS
mediates the expression of each of two phz operons and modulates
phenazine-1-carboxylic acid biosynthesis in detail. In this study, by deleting
the rpoS gene in the mutant PNΔphz1 and the mutant PNΔphz2, we found that the
phz1 operon contributes much more to phenazine-1-carboxylic acid biosynthesis
than the phz2 operon in the absence of RpoS. With the construction of the
translational and transcriptional fusion vectors with the truncated lacZ reporter
gene, we demonstrated that RpoS negatively regulates the expression of phz1 and
positively controls the expression of phz2, and the regulation of
phenazine-1-carboxylic acid biosynthesis mediated by RopS occurs at the
posttranscriptional level, not at the transcriptional level. Obviously, two
copies of phz operons and their differential expression mediated by RpoS might
help P. aeruginosa adapt to its diverse environments and establish infection in
its hosts.

© 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201900165 
PMID: 31294863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

