
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gene Regul Mech. 2019 Aug;1862(8):786-795. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2019.06.010. Epub 2019 Jul 9.

Temperature-dependent regulation of the Escherichia coli lpxT gene.

Sciandrone B(1), Forti F(1), Perego S(1), Falchi F(1), Briani F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy.
Electronic address: federica.briani@unimi.it.

The Lipid A moiety of the lipopolysaccharide can be covalently modified during
its transport to the outer membrane by different enzymes, among which the LpxT
inner membrane protein. LpxT transfers a phosphate group from the undecaprenyl
pyrophosphate to the Lipid A, a modification affecting the stability of the outer
membrane and its recognition by the host immune system in Enterobacteria. We
previously found that the expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa lpxT gene,
encoding LpxT, is induced in response to a temperature upshift and we proposed
that an RNA thermometer was responsible for such regulation. Here we show that
the Escherichia coli lpxT orthologous gene is down-regulated upon a temperature
upshift and investigated the mechanism of this regulation. We found that the LpxT
protein stability is not affected by the temperature change. Conversely, the lpxT
mRNA levels strongly decrease upon a shift from 28 to 42 °C. The lack of MicA
sRNA, which was previously implicated in lpxT regulation, does not affect lpxT
thermal regulation. We identified the lpxTp promoter and demonstrated that lpxTp 
has temperature-sensitive activity depending on its peculiar -10 region.
Moreover, we found that RNase E-dependent degradation of the lpxT mRNA is also
modulated by temperature causing a strong destabilization of the lpxT mRNA at
42 °C. In vitro data argue against the involvement of factors differentially
expressed at 28 and 42 °C in the temperature-dependent modulation of lpxT mRNA
stability.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2019.06.010 
PMID: 31299227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

