
1. J Dermatol. 2019 Sep;46(9):794-797. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.15008. Epub 2019 Jul
11.

Trichophyton tonsurans-induced kerion celsi with decreased defensin expression
and paradoxically increased interleukin-17A production.

Goto Y(1), Suzuki T(1), Suzuki Y(2), Anzawa K(3), Mochizuki T(3), Tamura T(4),
Makimura K(5), Aoshima M(6), Ito T(6), Tokura Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Fujinomiya City General Hospital, Fujinomiya, Japan.
(2)Division of Dermatology, Shizuoka Municipal Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Kanazawa Medical University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(4)General Medical Education and Research Center, Teikyo University, Tokyo,
Japan.
(5)Medical Mycology, Graduate School of Medicine, Teikyo University, Tokyo,
Japan.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu,
Japan.

We report a case of kerion celsi due to Trichophyton tonsurans. An 18-year-old
male student judo practitioner had alopecic patches, black dots and subcutaneous 
abscesses on the right temporal region. The damaged hair represented endothrix
infection with T. tonsurans, as assessed by mycological examinations. He was
treated with oral itraconazole without any therapeutic effect, followed by
terbinafine with good effect. A skin biopsy showed neutrophil, lymphocyte and
histiocyte infiltration into the dermis and subcutaneous tissue with abscesses
around a number of dilated hair follicles. Immunostaining showed that the
expression level of human β-defensin 2 (HBD-2) was decreased in the epidermis of 
the alopecic and adjacent skin. Because interleukin (IL)-17A generally induces
HBD-2 production by epidermal keratinocytes, we also immunohistochemically
investigated IL-17A expression. Unexpectedly, many IL-17A-bearing cells were
found around destructed hair follicles, indicating that IL-17A expression was not
attenuated, but rather increased in the skin lesion. Our case suggests that
IL-17A-upregulated antimicrobial peptide expression is disordered in kerion
celsi, and severe inflammation with IL-17A may cause tissue damage and resultant 
scar.

© 2019 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.15008 
PMID: 31294481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

