
1. Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis. 2019 Aug;65:207-212. doi:
10.1016/j.cimid.2019.01.012. Epub 2019 Jan 19.

Cloning and expression of immunogenic Clostridium botulinum C2I mutant proteins
designed from their evolutionary imprints.

Prisilla A(1), Chellapandi P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Systems Engineering Lab, Department of Bioinformatics, School of
Life Sciences, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, 620024, Tamil Nadu,
India.
(2)Molecular Systems Engineering Lab, Department of Bioinformatics, School of
Life Sciences, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, 620024, Tamil Nadu,
India. Electronic address: pchellapandi@bdu.ac.in.

C2 toxin produced from Clostridium botulinum serotypes C and D has a potential
role in many pathophysiological mechanisms in birds and animals. It has
encompassed an ADP ribosyltransferase subunit (C2I) and a translocation/binding
subunit (C2II). In the present study, we intended to produce C2I mutant proteins 
as recombinant subunit vaccines by using glutathione-S-transferase-gene fusion
system. The mutants of this study were previously evaluated from their
evolutionary imprints and suggested as suitable candidates for subunit vaccines. 
A synthetic C2 gene was inserted in a pGEX-2T vector, cloned and expressed in
Escherichia coli BL21 host. The expressed mutant proteins were purified by using 
glutathione-agarose column and then examined for their ADP ribosyltransferase
activity and vaccinogenic characteristics. The pGEX-2T-C2I constructs with Y298F,
S347A and S350A substitutions have shown effective transformation efficiencies in
E. coli XL10 competent cells but their mutagenesis efficiency was relatively low.
Gene expression analysis indicated the rate of gene expression was depended on
the fused mutant genes. A high-level expression was achieved for Y298F, S347A and
S350A mutant proteins. All purified protein exhibited a molecular mass of 49 kDa.
C2I mutant proteins exhibited a reduced ADP ribosyltransferase activity with
retained immunogenic and vaccinogenic characteristics compared to the wild-type
C2I subunit. The overall analysis of our study suggested the recombinant C2I
proteins (S197A and Y298F) are the most promising candidates for the development 
of subunit vaccine or immunogen for C2 mutants mediated diseases in birds and
animals.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cimid.2019.01.012 
PMID: 31300115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

