
1. NPJ Sci Food. 2019 Apr 3;3:5. doi: 10.1038/s41538-019-0038-8. eCollection 2019.

Role of fluid cohesiveness in safe swallowing.

Nishinari K(1), Turcanu M(2), Nakauma M(3), Fang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)1Glyn O. Phillips Hydrocolloids Research Centre, School of Food and Biological
Engineering, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, 430068 China.
(2)2Product & Process Engineering Center- Germany, Pharmaceuticals Division,
Fresenius Kabi Deutschland GmbH, Daimlerstrasse 22, 61352 Bad Homburg, Germany.
(3)San-Ei Gen F.F.I., Inc., 1-1-11, Sanwa-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 561-8588 Japan.
(4)4Department of Food Science and Engineering, School of Agriculture and
Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240 China.

In patients with dysphagia, it has been a practice to thicken fluid food to
prevent aspiration-the transport of a bolus into the trachea instead of the
oesophagus. In these patients, aspiration is a risk behaviour and is closely
related to pneumonia (caused by the aspiration of oral bacteria into the lungs). 
Since excessive thickening of fluids can cause adverse effects, such as lowering 
the palatability of food, subsequent reduction of liquid intake, dehydration and 
malnutrition, identifying the optimum thickening level is vital. Thickening might
not only increase fluid viscosity, but could also modify its cohesiveness, which 
is another key factor affecting aspiration. Even though cohesiveness is more of a
concept than a well-defined measurable parameter, this property describes the
degree of coherency provided by the internal structure of a material against its 
fractional breakup. In fluids, this concept is less explored than in solids,
powders and granules, and during the last decade few scientists have tackled this
topic. Although the role of cohesiveness in the swallowing of heterogeneous solid
foods is briefly overviewed, the aim of the present paper is to introduce the
concept of cohesiveness for a relatively homogeneous fluid bolus and its effect
on swallowing. Cohesiveness is highly correlated with the extensibility and yield
stress of the fluid, suggesting that a high cohesiveness could have an important 
role in preventing aspiration.

DOI: 10.1038/s41538-019-0038-8 
PMCID: PMC6550271
PMID: 31304277 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing interests.

