
1. Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 2020 Feb;34(1):102-108. doi: 10.1111/fcp.12499. Epub 2019 
Aug 5.

Effect of antimicrobial peptides HNP-1 and hBD-1 on Staphylococcus aureus strains
in vitro and in vivo.

Bolatchiev A(1), Baturin V(1), Bazikov I(2), Maltsev A(2), Kunitsina E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Stavropol State Medical University,
Stavropol, Russia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Stavropol State Medical University, Stavropol,
Russia.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology, The Center of Clinical Pharmacology and
Pharmacotherapy, Stavropol, Russia.

The aims of this study were: (i) To investigate the activity of recombinant AMPs 
HNP-1 and hBD-1 in combination with cefotaxime against Staphylococcus aureus
strains (MSSA and MRSA) in vitro using checkerboard method; (ii) To investigate
the activity of HNP-1 and hBD-1 encapsulated in silicon nanoparticles (niosomes) 
in the treatment of MRSA-infected wound in rats. For this S. aureus strains (MSSA
and MRSA) were isolated from patients with diabetic foot infection. Cefotaxime,
recombinant HNP-1 and hBD-1 (in all possible combinations with each other) were
used for testing by the checkerboard method. Two niosomal topical gels with
HNP-1/hBD-1 were prepared to treat MRSA-infected wounds in rats. Gels were
administered once a day, the control group-without treatment. Wound healing rate 
was calculated on the 4th, 9th and 16th days of the experiment and compared using
one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. MIC of HNP-1 for MSSA and MRSA was the 
same-1 mg/L. MIC of hBD-1 for MSSA and MRSA was also the same-0.5 mg/L. Topical
gels with niosomal HNP-1 (or hBD-1) showed a significantly faster wound healing
in comparison with the control. The data obtained open up prospects for use of
AMPs encapsulated in silica nanoparticles for the development of new antibiotics.

© 2019 Société Française de Pharmacologie et de Thérapeutique.

DOI: 10.1111/fcp.12499 
PMID: 31313350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

