
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Jun 28;10:1434. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01434. eCollection
2019.

Human Oral Epithelial Cells Impair Bacteria-Mediated Maturation of Dendritic
Cells and Render T Cells Unresponsive to Stimulation.

Molero-Abraham M(1), Sanchez-Trincado JL(1), Gomez-Perosanz M(1), Torres-Gomez
A(1), Subiza JL(2), Lafuente EM(1), Reche PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Complutense University of
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Inmunotek SL, Madrid, Spain.

The oral mucosa is a first line of defense against pathogenic organisms and yet
tolerates food antigens and resident bacteria. Mucosal epithelial cells are
emerging as important regulators of innate and adaptive immune responses.
However, the contribution of oral epithelial cells (OECs) determining oral
immunity is understudied. Here, we evaluated the ability of H413 and TR146 cells,
two OEC lines derived from human oral squamous cell carcinomas, and primary OECs 
to modulate immune responses to a cocktail of Gram+ and Gram- bacteria known as
MV130. OECs expressed CD40 constitutively and class II major histocompatibility
complex (MHC II) molecules when stimulated with IFNγ, but not CD80 or CD86.
Dendritic cells (DCs) treated with bacteria in co-culture with OECs did not fully
mature, as judged by the expression of MHC II, CD80 and CD86, and barely released
IL-12 and TNFα, compared to control DCs. Furthermore, in the presence of OECs,
DCs were unable to stimulate allogenic naive CD4 T cells to produce IFNγ and
TNFα. Similarly, OECs in culture with total CD4 T cells or Th1 cells stimulated
with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies abrogated CD25 and CD69 expression, T cell
proliferation and the release of IFNγ and TNFα. The inhibition on T cell
activation by OECs was cell-contact dependent, TGFβ independent and largely
irreversible. Overall, this behavior of OECs is likely key to avoid immune system
over-reaction against resident bacteria.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01434 
PMCID: PMC6611079
PMID: 31316504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

