
1. J Pept Sci. 2019 Aug;25(8):e3195. doi: 10.1002/psc.3195.

Structural determinants conferring unusual long life in human serum to
rattlesnake-derived antimicrobial peptide Ctn[15-34].

Pérez-Peinado C(1), Dias SA(2), Mendonça DA(2), Castanho MARB(2), Veiga AS(2),
Andreu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Health Science, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
Barcelona Biomedical Research Park, Barcelona, 08003, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisbon, 1649-028, Portugal.

Ctn[15-34], a downsized version of the snake venom cathelicidin-like peptide
crotalicidin (Ctn), shows an unusually high lifespan (t1/2 , approximately 12 h) 
in human serum, which significantly adds to its promise as an antimicrobial and
antitumor agent. Herein we investigate the role of Ctn[15-34] structure on serum 
survival. Using a set of analogs, we show that C-terminal amidation, as well as
the specific layout of the Ctn[15-34] sequence-a helical N-terminal domain
followed by a hydrophobic domain-is crucial for slow degradation, and any change 
in their arrangement results in significantly lower t1/2 . Aside from the
privileged primary structure, features such as self-aggregation can be ruled out 
as causes for the long serum life. Instead, studies in other protease-rich fluids
suggest a key role for certain human serum components. Finally, we demonstrate
that Ctn[15-34] is able to induce bacterial death even after 12-hour
pre-incubation in serum, in agreement with the proteolytic data. Altogether, the 
results shed light on the uncommon stability of Ctn[15-34] in human serum and
confirm its potential as an anti-infective lead.

© 2019 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/psc.3195 
PMID: 31317613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

