
1. Sci Total Environ. 2019 Nov 15;691:562-571. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.07.154.
Epub 2019 Jul 11.

Long-term N fertilization imbalances potential N acquisition and transformations 
by soil microbes.

Huang L(1), Riggins CW(1), Rodríguez-Zas S(2), Zabaloy MC(3), Villamil MB(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois, Department of Crop Sciences, Turner Hall, 1102 S.
Goodwin Ave., Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
(2)University of Illinois, Department of Animal Sciences, 30 ASL, 127 W. Gregory 
Dr., Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
(3)Centro de Recursos Naturales Renovables de la Zona Semiárida (CERZOS),
Universidad Nacional del Sur (UNS)-CONICET, San Andres 800, 8000 Bahía Blanca,
Argentina.
(4)University of Illinois, Department of Crop Sciences, Turner Hall, 1102 S.
Goodwin Ave., Urbana, IL 61801, USA. Electronic address: villamil@illinois.edu.

Nitrogen (N) fertilization in agricultural soils has been receiving worldwide
attention due to its detrimental effects on ecosystem services, particularly on
microbial N transformation. However, few studies provide a complete picture of
N-fertilization effects on the N transformation cycle within a single
agricultural ecosystem. Here, we explored the main steps of the microbial N
cycle, using targeted gene abundances as proxies, in relation to soil properties,
following 35 years of N-fertilization at increasing rates (0, 202 and
269 kg N/ha) in continuous corn (Zea mays L.) and corn-soybean [Glycine max (L.) 
Merr.] rotations. We used real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
for the quantification of phylogenetic groups and functional gene screening of
the soil microbial communities, including genes encoding critical enzymes of the 
microbial N cycle: nifH (N2 fixation), amoA (first step of nitrification), nirK
and nirS (first step of denitrification), and nosZ (last step of
denitrification). Our results showed that long term N-fertilization increased the
abundance of fungal communities likely related to decreases in pH, and an
enrichment of Al3+ and Fe3+ in exchange sites at the expense of critical macro
and micronutrients. At the same time, long term N-fertilization damaged potential
biological N2 fixation by significantly reducing the abundance of nifH genes in
both continuous and rotated corn systems, while accelerating potential
nitrification activities under continuous corn by increasing the abundance of
bacterial amoA. Fertilization did not affect the abundance of denitrifying
groups. Altogether, these results suggest that N fertilization in corn crops
potentially decreases N2 acquisition by free-living soil microbes and stimulates 
nitrification activities, thus creating a vicious loop that makes the overall
agricultural system even more dependent on external N inputs.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.07.154 
PMID: 31325856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

