
1. mBio. 2019 Jul 23;10(4). pii: e01146-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01146-19.

Identification of Dephospho-Coenzyme A (Dephospho-CoA) Kinase in Thermococcus
kodakarensis and Elucidation of the Entire CoA Biosynthesis Pathway in Archaea.

Shimosaka T(1)(2), Makarova KS(3), Koonin EV(3), Atomi H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Synthetic Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of
Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Synthetic Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of
Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan atomi@sbchem.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Dephospho-coenzyme A (dephospho-CoA) kinase (DPCK) catalyzes the ATP-dependent
phosphorylation of dephospho-CoA, the final step in coenzyme A (CoA)
biosynthesis. DPCK has been identified and characterized in bacteria and
eukaryotes but not in archaea. The hyperthermophilic archaeon Thermococcus
kodakarensis encodes two homologs of bacterial DPCK and the DPCK domain of
eukaryotic CoA synthase, TK1334 and TK2192. We purified the recombinant TK1334
and TK2192 proteins and found that they lacked DPCK activity. Bioinformatic
analyses showed that, in several archaea, the uncharacterized gene from
arCOG04076 protein is fused with the gene for phosphopantetheine
adenylyltransferase (PPAT), which catalyzes the reaction upstream of the DPCK
reaction in CoA biosynthesis. This observation suggested that members of
arCOG04076, both fused to PPAT and standalone, could be the missing archaeal
DPCKs. We purified the recombinant TK1697 protein, a standalone member of
arCOG04076 from T. kodakarensis, and demonstrated its GTP-dependent DPCK
activity. Disruption of the TK1697 resulted in CoA auxotrophy, indicating that
TK1697 encodes a DPCK that contributes to CoA biosynthesis in T. kodakarensis
TK1697 homologs are widely distributed in archaea, suggesting that the arCOG04076
protein represents a novel family of DPCK that is not homologous to bacterial and
eukaryotic DPCKs but is distantly related to bacterial and eukaryotic thiamine
pyrophosphokinases. We also constructed and characterized gene disruption strains
of TK0517 and TK2128, homologs of bifunctional phosphopantothenoylcysteine
synthetase-phosphopantothenoylcysteine decarboxylase and PPAT, respectively. Both
strains displayed CoA auxotrophy, indicating their contribution to CoA
biosynthesis. Taken together with previous studies, the results experimentally
validate the entire CoA biosynthesis pathway in T. kodakarensis IMPORTANCE CoA is
utilized in a wide range of metabolic pathways, and its biosynthesis is essential
for all life. Pathways for CoA biosynthesis in bacteria and eukaryotes have been 
established. In archaea, however, the enzyme that catalyzes the final step in CoA
biosynthesis, dephospho-CoA kinase (DPCK), had not been identified. In the
present study, bioinformatic analyses identified a candidate for the DPCK in
archaea, which was biochemically and genetically confirmed in the
hyperthermophilic archaeon Thermococcus kodakarensis Genetic analyses on genes
presumed to encode bifunctional phosphopantothenoylcysteine
synthetase-phosphopantothenoylcysteine decarboxylase and phosphopantetheine
adenylyltransferase confirmed their involvement in CoA biosynthesis. Taken
together with previous studies, the results reveal the entire pathway for CoA
biosynthesis in a single archaeon and provide insight into the different
mechanisms of CoA biosynthesis and their distribution in nature.

Copyright Â© 2019 Shimosaka et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01146-19 
PMCID: PMC6650551
PMID: 31337720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

