
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jul 23;14(7):e0220045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0220045.
eCollection 2019.

Structure and functional analysis of a bacterial adhesin sugar-binding domain.

Vance TDR(1), Guo S(1), Assaie-Ardakany S(1), Conroy B(1), Davies PL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Science, Queen's University, Kingston, 
Ontario, Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2019 Aug 8;14(8):e0221101.

Bacterial adhesins attach their hosts to surfaces through one or more
ligand-binding domains. In RTX adhesins, which are localized to the outer
membrane of many Gram-negative bacteria via the type I secretion system, we see
several examples of a putative sugar-binding domain. Here we have recombinantly
expressed one such ~20-kDa domain from the ~340-kDa adhesin found in Marinobacter
hydrocarbonoclasticus, an oil-degrading bacterium. The sugar-binding domain was
purified from E. coli with a yield of 100 mg/L of culture. Circular dichroism
analysis showed that the protein was rich in beta-structure, was moderately heat 
resistant, and required Ca2+ for proper folding. A crystal structure was obtained
in Ca2+ at 1.2-Å resolution, which showed the presence of three Ca2+ ions, two of
which were needed for structural integrity and one for binding sugars. Glucose
was soaked into the crystal, where it bound to the sugar's two vicinal hydroxyl
groups attached to the first and second (C1 and C2) carbons in the pyranose ring.
This attraction to glucose caused the protein to bind certain
polysaccharide-based column matrices and was used in a simple competitive binding
assay to assess the relative affinity of sugars for the protein's ligand-binding 
site. Fucose, glucose and N-acetylglucosamine bound most tightly, and
N-acetylgalactosamine hardly bound at all. Isothermal titration calorimetry was
used to determine specific binding affinities, which lie in the 100-μM range.
Glycan arrays were tested to expand the range of ligand sugars assayed, and
showed that MhPA14 bound preferentially to branched polymers containing terminal 
sugars highlighted as strong binders in the competitive binding assay. Some of
these binders have vicinal hydroxyl groups attached to the C3 and C4 carbons that
are sterically equivalent to those presented by the C1 and C2 carbons of glucose.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0220045 
PMCID: PMC6650083
PMID: 31335890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

