
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2020 Jan;190(1):232-251. doi:
10.1007/s12010-019-03074-2. Epub 2019 Jul 22.

Screening and Bioprospecting of Anaerobic Consortia for Biofuel Production
Enhancement from Sugarcane Bagasse.

Soares LA(1), Silva Rabelo CAB(2), Sakamoto IK(2), Silva EL(3), Varesche MBA(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of São Paulo, João Dagnone Avenue, 1100, São Carlos, SP, 13563-120,
Brazil. laisamerico@usp.br.
(2)University of São Paulo, João Dagnone Avenue, 1100, São Carlos, SP, 13563-120,
Brazil.
(3)Federal University of São Carlos, Rod Washington Luis, Km 235, São Carlos, SP,
13565-905, Brazil.

The genera Dysgonomonas, Coprococcus, Sporomusa, Bacteroides, Sedimentibacter,
Pseudomonas, Ruminococcus, and Clostridium predominate in compost residue, and
vadimCA02, Anaerobaculum, Tatlockia, Caloramator, and Syntrophus prevail in soil 
used as inoculum in batch rectors. This mixed consortium was used as inoculum for
biogas production using different concentrations of sugarcane bagasse (SCB) (from
1.58 to 4.42 g/L) and yeast extract (YE) (from 0.58 to 3.42 g/L) according to a
composite central design. The maximum ethanol production (20.11 mg L-1) was
observed using 2.0 and 3.0 g L-1 of YE and SCB, respectively (C6). Likewise, the 
highest hydrogen production (0.60 mmol L-1) was observed using 3.0 and 4.0 g L-1 
of YE and SCB, respectively (C1). Methane was also observed, reaching the maximum
production (1.44 mmol L-1) using 1.0 and 4.0 g L-1 of YE and SCB, respectively
(C2). The archaeal similarity between these conditions was above 90%; however,
the richness and diversity were higher in the C2 (12 and 2.42, respectively) than
in C1 (5 and 1.43, respectively) and C6 (11 and 2.29, respectively). Equally, the
bacterial similarity between C1 and C6 was 60% while richness of 24 and 17 and
diversity of 3.13 and 2.81 were observed in C1 and C6, respectively.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-019-03074-2 
PMID: 31332677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

