
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2019 Aug 14;67(32):8794-8809. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.9b03136.
Epub 2019 Aug 6.

Processed Meat Protein Promoted Inflammation and Hepatic Lipogenesis by
Upregulating Nrf2/Keap1 Signaling Pathway in Glrx-Deficient Mice.

Ahmad MI(1), Zou X(1), Ijaz MU(1), Hussain M(1), Liu C(1), Xu X(1), Zhou G(1), Li
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Meat Processing and Quality Control, MOE; Key Laboratory of 
Meat Processing, MARA; Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Meat Production
and Processing, Quality and Safety Control; College of Food Science and
Technology , Nanjing Agricultural University , Nanjing , 210095 , China.

Oxidative stress may play a critical role in the progression of liver disorders. 
Increasing interest has been given to the associations among diet, oxidative
stress, gut-liver axis, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Here, we
investigated the effects of processed meat proteins on biomarkers of lipid
homeostasis, hepatic metabolism, antioxidant functions, and gut microbiota
composition in glutaredoxin1 deficient (Glrx1-/-) mice. The wild-type (WT) and
Glrx1-/- mice were fed a soy protein diet (SPD), a dry-cured pork protein diet
(DPD), a braised pork protein diet (BPD), and a cooked pork protein diet (CPD) at
a dose of 20% of protein for 3 months. Serum and hepatic total cholesterol, serum
endotoxin, hepatic liver droplet %, and antioxidant capacity were significantly
increased in the CPD fed WT mice. In addition, CPD fed Glrx1-/- mice
significantly increased total cholesterol, triacylglycerol, and pro-inflammatory 
cytokines which are accompanied by higher steatosis scores, intrahepatic lipid
accumulation, and altered gene expression associated with lipid metabolism.
Furthermore, hepatic gene expression of Nrf2/keap1 signaling pathway and its
downstream signaling targets were determined using RT-qPCR. Glrx1 deficiency
increased Nrf2 activity and expression of its target genes (GPx, catalase, SOD1, 
G6pd, and Bbc3), which was exacerbated by intake of CPD. Metagenomic analyses
revealed that Glrx1-/- mice fed meat protein diets had higher abundances of
Mucispirillum, Oscillibacter, and Mollicutes but lower abundances of
Bacteroidales S24-7 group_norank, Blautia, and Anaerotruncus than their wild-type
counterparts. In summary, Glrx1 deficiency induced an increase in serum
biomarkers for lipid homeostasis, gut microbiota imbalance, and upregulation of
Nrf2/Keap1 and antioxidant defense genes, which was aggravated by cooked meat
protein diet.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.9b03136 
PMID: 31345023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

