
1. Food Funct. 2019 Aug 1;10(8):4985-4997. doi: 10.1039/c8fo02340a. Epub 2019 Jul
26.

Sourdough technology as a novel approach to overcome quality losses in
sugar-reduced cakes.

Sahin AW (1), Rice T , Zannini E , Lynch KM , Coffey A , Arendt EK .

Author information: 
(1)School of Food and Nutritional Sciences, University College Cork, Ireland.

Sugar reduction in sweet baked goods is one of the most popular trends on the
food market. However, reducing sugar without lowering the product quality with
respect to sweetness, texture and microbial shelf life is challenging. Sugar
alcohols are one group of sugar replacers which maintain the bulk and contribute 
to sweetness. Nevertheless, alternative approaches, particularly those that are
seen as 'clean label', are highly demanded. Hence, the natural, in situ
production of mannitol in a sourdough system was performed and its potential as a
functional ingredient to improve the product quality of a sugar-reduced cake was 
investigated. A full sugar cake (C1), a 50% sugar-reduced cake with wheat starch 
(C2) or with commercially available mannitol (C3) were considered as controls.
The substitution of sugar by wheat starch or mannitol caused lower specific
volume (-15.5%; -10.7%), a harder crumb (+17.1 N; +4.4 N), less browning, a
shorter microbial shelf life (-5.7 days; -4.3 days) and poorer sensory
properties. The incorporation of sourdough in C2 improved the pasting properties 
by decreasing the peak viscosity. Moreover, it resulted in a similar specific
volume to the full-sugar control, contributed to significantly softer crumb (-8.6
N) and increased browning compared to C2. Sensory evaluation revealed an
increased sweetness perception (+93%), aroma (+30%) and flavour (+25.5%) by the
incorporation of sourdough. Although sourdough incorporation improved
sugar-reduced cakes, the quality characteristics of the full-sugar control could 
not be achieved in this study. In conclusion, the addition of sourdough in
amounts lower than 10% can be considered a useful tool to improve specific
volume, crumb structure, colour, taste and flavour, as well as shelf life of
sugar-reduced cakes.

DOI: 10.1039/c8fo02340a 
PMID: 31347616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

