
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2020 Apr;77(7):1387-1399. doi: 10.1007/s00018-019-03235-w.
Epub 2019 Jul 24.

CCL21/CCR7 signaling in macrophages promotes joint inflammation and Th17-mediated
osteoclast formation in rheumatoid arthritis.

Van Raemdonck K(1)(2), Umar S(1)(2), Palasiewicz K(1)(2), Volkov S(2), Volin
MV(3), Arami S(1)(2), Chang HJ(1)(2), Zanotti B(3), Sweiss N(2), Shahrara
S(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 840 S Wood Street, CSB Suite 1114, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Midwestern University, Downers
Grove, IL, USA.
(4)Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. shahrara@uic.edu.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 840 S Wood Street, CSB Suite 1114, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA.
shahrara@uic.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2019 Oct;15(10):576.

In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), synovial tissue abundantly expresses CCL21, a
chemokine strongly associated with RA susceptibility. In this study, we aimed to 
characterize the functional significance of CCL21/CCR7 signaling in different
phases of RA pathogenesis. We determined that CCR7 is a hallmark of RA M1
synovial fluid (SF) macrophages, and its expression in RA monocytes and in vitro 
differentiated macrophages is closely associated with disease activity score
(DAS28). In early stages of RA, monocytes infiltrate the synovial tissue.
However, blockade of SF CCL21 or CCR7 prevents RA SF-mediated monocyte migration.
CCR7 expression in the newly migrated macrophages can be accentuated by LPS and
IFNγ and suppressed by IL-4 treatment. We also uncovered that CCL21 stimulation
increases the number of M1-polarized macrophages (CD14+CD86+), resulting in
elevated transcription of IL-6 and IL-23. These CCL21-induced M1 cytokines
differentiate naïve T cells to Th17 cells, without affecting Th1 cell
polarization. In the erosive stages of disease, CCL21 potentiates RA
osteoclastogenesis through M1-driven Th17 polarization. Disruption of this
intricate crosstalk, by blocking IL-6, IL-23, or IL-17 function, impairs the
osteoclastogenic capacity of CCL21. Consistent with our in vitro findings, we
establish that arthritis mediated by CCL21 expands the joint inflammation to bone
erosion by connecting the differentiation of M1 macrophages with Th17 cells.
Disease progression is further exacerbated by CCL21-induced neovascularization.
We conclude that CCL21 is an attractive novel target for RA therapy, as blockade 
of its function may abrogate erosive arthritis modulated by M1 macrophages and
Th17 cell crosstalk.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-019-03235-w 
PMID: 31342120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

