
1. Aging Cell. 2019 Oct;18(5):e13016. doi: 10.1111/acel.13016. Epub 2019 Jul 28.

Augmentation of cellular NAD+ by NQO1 enzymatic action improves age-related
hearing impairment.

Kim HJ(1)(2), Cao W(1), Oh GS(2), Lee S(2), Shen A(1), Khadka D(1), Lee SB(1),
Sharma S(1), Kim SY(1), Choe SK(1), Kwak TH(2), Kim JM(3), Park R(4), So HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Metabolic Function Regulation (CMFR) and Department of
Microbiology, Wonkwang University School of Medicine, Jeonbuk, Korea.
(2)NADIANBIO Ltd, Business Incubation Center, Iksan, Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology and Infection Signaling Network Research Center,
Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon, Korea.
(4)Department of Biomedical Science & Engineering, Institute of Integrated
Technology, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Korea.

Age-related hearing loss (ARHL) is a major neurodegenerative disorder and the
leading cause of communication deficit in the elderly population, which remains
largely untreated. The development of ARHL is a multifactorial event that
includes both intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Recent studies suggest that NAD+
/NADH ratio may play a critical role in cellular senescence by regulating
sirtuins, PARP-1, and PGC-1α. Nonetheless, the beneficial effect of direct
modulation of cellular NAD+ levels on aging and age-related diseases has not been
studied, and the underlying mechanisms remain obscure. Herein, we investigated
the effect of β-lapachone (β-lap), a known plant-derived metabolite that
modulates cellular NAD+ by conversion of NADH to NAD+ via the enzymatic action of
NADH: quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) on ARHL in C57BL/6 mice. We elucidated that
the reduction of cellular NAD+ during the aging process was an important
contributor for ARHL; it facilitated oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory
responses in the cochlear tissue through regulating sirtuins that alter various
signaling pathways, such as NF-κB, p53, and IDH2. However, augmentation of NAD+
by β-lap effectively prevented ARHL and accompanying deleterious effects through 
reducing inflammation and oxidative stress, sustaining mitochondrial function,
and promoting mitochondrial biogenesis in rodents. These results suggest that
direct regulation of cellular NAD+ levels by pharmacological agents may be a
tangible therapeutic option for treating various age-related diseases, including 
ARHL.

© 2019 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13016 
PMCID: PMC6718544
PMID: 31353811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

