
1. Parasitol Res. 2019 Sep;118(9):2509-2521. doi: 10.1007/s00436-019-06408-5. Epub
2019 Aug 3.

Identification of a new type of haematopoietic progenitor kinase-interacting
protein (HIP-55) in Aedes aegypti mosquito haemocytes and its involvement in
immunity-like functions in mosquito: a molecular study.

Batcha MM(1)(2), Ahamed AS(3), Peng CF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, HKRH College, Uthamapalayam, Theni District, Tamil
Nadu, India. mbatcha73@gmail.com.
(2)Post Doctoral Scientist, Institute of Tropical Medicine, National Yang Ming
University, Shihpai, Taipei-112, Taiwan, Republic of China. mbatcha73@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology, HKRH College, Uthamapalayam, Theni District, Tamil
Nadu, India.
(4)Fuga Biotechnology, Chongqing S. Rd, Zhongzheng Dist, Taipei - 100, Taiwan.

In this study, we characterize the HIP-55 protein in the mosquito Aedes aegypti
for the first time. HIP-55 is a 55-kDa HPK1-interacting protein that is also
called SH3P7. HIP-55 constitutively binds HPK1 'via' an HPK1 proline-rich motif
2(PR2) through its C-terminal SH3 domain. HIP-55 critically interacts with
ZAP-70, and this interaction was induced by TCR signalling. ZAP-70 phosphorylated
HIP-55 at Tyr-334 and Tyr-344 in vitro and in vivo. In our previous findings,
AaZAP gene expression strongly proved that AaZAP-70 was involved in immunity-like
functions in mosquito. Northern blot analysis of HIP-55 mRNA expression confirmed
that it is only expressed in the abdomen and haemocyte tissues; this prediction
correlates 100% and a polyclonal antibody also confirmed its localization in
haemocytes and the abdomen. We prepared extracts to show the cytoplasmic
expression (CE) of this protein. Previous results had proven that this protein is
secreted from the cytoplasm; thus, we confirmed here that the protein is a
cytoplasmic adaptor protein in mosquitoes and mammalian systems. Furthermore, our
polyclonal antibody against HIP-55 also demonstrated that this protein is found
in haemocytes and abdomen tissues, which assumes that the protein may be involved
in phagocytic-like functions. RNAi (siRNA) silencing studies were used to degrade
mosquito HIP-55; however, silencing only slightly affected the HIP-55 sequence
and the gene transcriptional level. To characterize this protein, we cloned
609Â bp from the 1.6-kb full-length cDNA using a pET28 vector for polyclonal
antibody production. Graphical abstract.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-019-06408-5 
PMID: 31377908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

