
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Sep 23;63(10). pii: e00564-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00564-19. Print 2019 Oct.

Molecular Basis of Class A β-Lactamase Inhibition by Relebactam.

Tooke CL(1), Hinchliffe P(1), Lang PA(2), Mulholland AJ(3), Brem J(2), Schofield 
CJ(2), Spencer J(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Biomedical Sciences Building,
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Computational Chemistry, School of Chemistry, University of
Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Biomedical Sciences Building,
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom Jim.Spencer@bristol.ac.uk.

β-Lactamase production is the major β-lactam resistance mechanism in
Gram-negative bacteria. β-Lactamase inhibitors (BLIs) efficacious against serine 
β-lactamase (SBL) producers, especially strains carrying the widely disseminated 
class A enzymes, are required. Relebactam, a diazabicyclooctane (DBO) BLI, is in 
phase 3 clinical trials in combination with imipenem for the treatment of
infections by multidrug-resistant Enterobacteriaceae We show that relebactam
inhibits five clinically important class A SBLs (despite their differing spectra 
of activity), representing both chromosomal and plasmid-borne enzymes, i.e., the 
extended-spectrum β-lactamases L2 (inhibition constant 3 μM) and CTX-M-15 (21 μM)
and the carbapenemases KPC-2, -3, and -4 (1 to 5 μM). Against purified class A
SBLs, relebactam is an inferior inhibitor compared with the clinically approved
DBO avibactam (9- to 120-fold differences in half maximal inhibitory
concentration [IC50]). MIC assays indicate relebactam potentiates β-lactam
(imipenem) activity against KPC-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae, with similar
potency to avibactam (with ceftazidime). Relebactam is less effective than
avibactam in combination with aztreonam against Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
K279a. X-ray crystal structures of relebactam bound to CTX-M-15, L2, KPC-2,
KPC-3, and KPC-4 reveal its C2-linked piperidine ring can sterically clash with
Asn104 (CTX-M-15) or His/Trp105 (L2 and KPCs), rationalizing its poorer
inhibition activity than that of avibactam, which has a smaller C2 carboxyamide
group. Mass spectrometry and crystallographic data show slow, pH-dependent
relebactam desulfation by KPC-2, -3, and -4. This comprehensive comparison of
relebactam binding across five clinically important class A SBLs will inform the 
design of future DBOs, with the aim of improving clinical efficacy of
BLI-β-lactam combinations.

Copyright © 2019 Tooke et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00564-19 
PMCID: PMC6761529
PMID: 31383664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

