
1. Cells. 2019 Aug 3;8(8). pii: E823. doi: 10.3390/cells8080823.

Combination Therapy of Mesenchymal Stromal Cells and Interleukin-4 Attenuates
Rheumatoid Arthritis in a Collagen-Induced Murine Model.

Haikal SM(1), Abdeltawab NF(2), Rashed LA(3), Abd El-Galil TI(4), Elmalt HA(5),
Amin MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo
University, Cairo 11562, Egypt.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo
University, Cairo 11562, Egypt. nourtan.abdeltawab@pharma.cu.edu.eg.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo
University, Cairo 11562, Egypt.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University,
Cairo 11562, Egypt.
(5)Department of Medical Biochemistry, National Research Center, Cairo 11562,
Egypt.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a disease of the joints that causes decreased
quality of life. Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) have immunosuppressive
properties, with possible use in the treatment of RA. Similarly, interleukin
(IL)-4 has been shown as a potential RA treatment. However, their combination has
not been explored before. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the effect
of a combination therapy of MSCs and IL-4 in the treatment of RA, using a murine 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model. Arthritis was induced in Balb/c mice by
two intradermal injections of type II collagen (CII), at days 0 and 21. CIA mice 
were randomly assigned to four groups; group I received an intravenous injection 
of mouse bone marrow-derived MSCs, while group II received an intraperitoneal
injection of IL-4. Group III received a combined treatment of MSC and IL-4, while
group IV served as a CIA diseased control group receiving phosphate buffer saline
(PBS). A fifth group of healthy mice served as the normal healthy control. To
assess changes induced by different treatments, levels of RA-associated
inflammatory cytokines and biomarkers were measured in the serum, knee joints,
and synovial tissue, using ELISA and Real Time-qPCR. Histopathological features
of knee joints were analyzed for all groups. Results showed that combined MSC and
IL-4 treatment alleviated signs of synovitis in CIA mice, reverting to the values
of healthy controls. This was evident by the decrease in the levels of rheumatic 
factor (RF), C-reactive protein (CRP) and anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) by 64,
80, and 71%, respectively, compared to the diseased group. Moreover, tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF- Î±) and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1)
levels decreased by 63 and 68%, respectively. Similarly, our gene expression data
showed improvement in mice receiving combined therapy compared to other groups
receiving single treatment, where cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (Comp),
tissue inhibitor metalloproteinase-1 (Timp1), matrix metalloproteinase1 (Mmp-1), 
and IL-1 receptor (Il-1r) gene expression levels decreased by 75, 70, and 78%,
respectively. Collectively, treatment with a combined therapy of MSC and IL-4
might have an efficient therapeutic effect on arthritis. Thus, further studies
are needed to assess the potential of different MSC populations in conjugation
with IL-4 in the treatment of experimental arthritis.

DOI: 10.3390/cells8080823 
PMCID: PMC6721641
PMID: 31382595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

