
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Aug 5;20(15). pii: E3817. doi: 10.3390/ijms20153817.

Protein Phosphatase Ppz1 Is Not Regulated by a Hal3-Like Protein in Plant
Pathogen Ustilago maydis.

Zhang C(1), de la Torre A(2), Pérez-Martín J(2), Ariño J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular and Institut de Biotecnologia i
Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, 08193
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Biología Funcional y Genómica (CSIC), 37007 Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular and Institut de Biotecnologia i
Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, 08193
Barcelona, Spain. Joaquin.Arino@uab.es.

Ppz enzymes are type-1 related Ser/Thr protein phosphatases that are restricted
to fungi. In S. cerevisiae and other fungi, Ppz1 is involved in cation
homeostasis and is regulated by two structurally-related inhibitory subunits,
Hal3 and Vhs3, with Hal3 being the most physiologically relevant. Remarkably,
Hal3 and Vhs3 have moonlighting properties, as they participate in an atypical
heterotrimeric phosphopantothenoyl cysteine decarboxylase (PPCDC), a key enzyme
for Coenzyme A biosynthesis. Here we identify and functionally characterize Ppz1 
phosphatase (UmPpz1) and its presumed regulatory subunit (UmHal3) in the plant
pathogen fungus Ustilago maydis. UmPpz1 is not an essential protein in U. maydis 
and, although possibly related to the cell wall integrity pathway, is not
involved in monovalent cation homeostasis. The expression of UmPpz1 in S.
cerevisiae Ppz1-deficient cells partially mimics the functions of the endogenous 
enzyme. In contrast to what was found in C. albicans and A. fumigatus, UmPpz1 is 
not a virulence determinant. UmHal3, an unusually large protein, is the only
functional PPCDC in U. maydis and, therefore, an essential protein. However, when
overexpressed in U. maydis or S. cerevisiae, UmHal3 does not reproduce
Ppz1-inhibitory phenotypes. Indeed, UmHal3 does not inhibit UmPpz1 in vitro
(although ScHal3 does). Therefore, UmHal3 might not be a moonlighting protein.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20153817 
PMCID: PMC6695811
PMID: 31387236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

