
1. Cancer Res. 2019 Oct 1;79(19):4965-4977. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-1110. Epub
2019 Aug 6.

DAXX Suppresses Tumor-Initiating Cells in Estrogen Receptor-Positive Breast
Cancer Following Endocrine Therapy.

Peiffer DS(1), Wyatt D(2), Zlobin A(2), Piracha A(3), Ng J(3), Dingwall AK(4),
Albain KS(5), Osipo C(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)MD/PhD and Integrated Cell Biology Programs, Loyola University Chicago Stritch
School of Medicine, Maywood, Illinois.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois.
(3)Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Department of Pathology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cardinal Bernardin
Cancer Center, Loyola University Chicago Stritch School of Medicine, Maywood,
Illinois.
(6)Department of Cancer Biology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois.
cosipo@luc.edu.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood,
Illinois.

Estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer recurrence is thought to be driven 
by tumor-initiating cells (TIC). TICs are enriched by endocrine therapy through
NOTCH signaling. Side effects have limited clinical trial testing of
NOTCH-targeted therapies. Death-associated factor 6 (DAXX) is a newly identified 
marker whose RNA expression inversely correlates with NOTCH in human ER+ breast
tumor samples. In this study, knockdown and overexpression approaches were used
to investigate the role of DAXX on stem/pluripotent gene expression, TIC survival
in vitro, and TIC frequency in vivo, and the mechanism by which DAXX suppresses
TICs in ER+ breast cancer. 17β-Estradiol (E2)-mediated ER activation stabilized
the DAXX protein, which was required for repressing stem/pluripotent genes
(NOTCH4, SOX2, OCT4, NANOG, and ALDH1A1), and TICs in vitro and in vivo.
Conversely, endocrine therapy promoted rapid protein depletion due to increased
proteasome activity. DAXX was enriched at promoters of stem/pluripotent genes,
which was lost with endocrine therapy. Ectopic expression of DAXX decreased
stem/pluripotent gene transcripts to levels similar to E2 treatment.
DAXX-mediated repression of stem/pluripotent genes and suppression of TICs was
dependent on DNMT1. DAXX or DNMT1 was necessary to inhibit methylation of CpGs
within the SOX2 promoter and moderately within the gene body of NOTCH4, NOTCH
activation, and TIC survival. E2-mediated stabilization of DAXX was necessary and
sufficient to repress stem/pluripotent genes by recruiting DNMT1 to methylate
some promoters and suppress TICs. These findings suggest that a combination of
endocrine therapy and DAXX-stabilizing agents may inhibit ER+ tumor recurrence.
SIGNIFICANCE: Estradiol-mediated stabilization of DAXX is necessary and
sufficient to repress genes associated with stemness, suggesting that the
combination of endocrine therapy and DAXX-stabilizing agents may inhibit tumor
recurrence in ER+ breast cancer.

©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-1110 
PMCID: PMC6774875
PMID: 31387918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

