
1. Nat Microbiol. 2019 Dec;4(12):2204-2215. doi: 10.1038/s41564-019-0520-8. Epub
2019 Aug 12.

DABs are inorganic carbon pumps found throughout prokaryotic phyla.

Desmarais JJ(1), Flamholz AI(1), Blikstad C(1), Dugan EJ(1), Laughlin TG(1),
Oltrogge LM(1), Chen AW(2), Wetmore K(3), Diamond S(4), Wang JY(2), Savage DF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology Division, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, Berkeley,
CA, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA, USA. savage@berkeley.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Microbiol. 2019 Dec;4(12):2029-2030.

Bacterial autotrophs often rely on CO2 concentrating mechanisms (CCMs) to
assimilate carbon. Although many CCM proteins have been identified, a systematic 
screen of the components of CCMs is lacking. Here, we performed a genome-wide
barcoded transposon screen to identify essential and CCM-related genes in the
γ-proteobacterium Halothiobacillus neapolitanus. Screening revealed that the CCM 
comprises at least 17 and probably no more than 25 genes, most of which are
encoded in 3 operons. Two of these operons (DAB1 and DAB2) contain a two-gene
locus that encodes a domain of unknown function (Pfam: PF10070) and a putative
cation transporter (Pfam: PF00361). Physiological and biochemical assays
demonstrated that these proteins-which we name DabA and DabB, for DABs accumulate
bicarbonate-assemble into a heterodimeric complex, which contains a putative
β-carbonic anhydrase-like active site and functions as an energy-coupled
inorganic carbon (Ci) pump. Interestingly, DAB operons are found in a diverse
range of bacteria and archaea. We demonstrate that functional DABs are present in
the human pathogens Bacillus anthracis and Vibrio cholerae. On the basis of these
results, we propose that DABs constitute a class of energized Ci pumps and play a
critical role in the metabolism of Ci throughout prokaryotic phyla.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-019-0520-8 
PMID: 31406332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

