
1. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2019;116(8):660-667. doi:
10.11405/nisshoshi.116.660.

[Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma of the appendix concomitant with
appendicitis:a case report].

[Article in Japanese]

Adachi K(1), Ogasawara N(1), Tamura Y(1), Izawa S(1), Hijikata Y(1), Ebi M(1),
Satou A(2), Funaki Y(1), Sasaki M(1), Kasugai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine.
(2)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine.

An 82-year-old man with abdominal pain was admitted to our hospital. Laboratory
tests revealed the following:white blood cells, 14300/Î¼l;serum hemoglobin level, 
12.9g/dl;serum C-reactive protein level, 0.38mg/dl;and negative anti-Helicobacter
pylori immunoglobulin G test. Abdominal computed tomography revealed a tumor in
the appendix along with multiple swollen lymph nodes. Colonoscopy revealed a
submucosal tumor (SMT) of approximately 30mm in diameter with central ulceration.
However, a tumor tissue specimen could not be obtained for biopsy;thus, the tumor
could not be diagnosed. In esophagogastroduodenoscopy, abnormalities or gastric
mucosal atrophy was not observed. A rapid urease test yielded negative results.
Hence, endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration for the SMT was
recommended;however, the patient preferred to undergo a definitive surgery to
establish exact diagnosis. Therefore, right hemicolectomy and lymph node
dissection (D3) were performed. Histopathologically, the resected tumor specimen 
showed atypical lymphocytes. Additionally, immunohistochemical evaluation
demonstrated positive staining of the tumor cells for CD20 and BCL2 and negative 
staining for CD34, CD4, CD10, and BCL6. The tumor was finally diagnosed as a
stage II2 mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma (Lugano classification).
Postoperatively, the patient received chemotherapy with four cycles of rituximab 
based on his age and activities of daily living.

DOI: 10.11405/nisshoshi.116.660 
PMID: 31406071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

