
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Aug 13;20(16). pii: E3933. doi: 10.3390/ijms20163933.

Streptococcal Pyrogenic Exotoxin A-Stimulated Monocytes Mediate Regulatory T-Cell
Accumulation through PD-L1 and Kynurenine.

Giesbrecht K(1)(2), Förmer S(1), Sähr A(1), Heeg K(1)(2), Hildebrand D(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Centre for Infectious Diseases, University
Hospital Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)DZIF German Center for Infection Research, 38124 Brunswick, Germany.
(3)Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Centre for Infectious Diseases, University
Hospital Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
dagmar.hildebrand@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(4)DZIF German Center for Infection Research, 38124 Brunswick, Germany.
dagmar.hildebrand@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Bacterial superantigens (SAgs) are exotoxins that promote a fulminant activation 
of the immune system. The subsequent intense release of inflammatory cytokines
often results in hypotension, shock, and organ failure with high mortality rates.
In the current paradigm, the direct and simultaneous binding of SAgs with T-cell 
receptor (TCR)-bearing Vβ regions and conserved structures on major
histocompatibility complex class II (MHC class II) on antigen-presenting cells
(APCs) induces the activation of both cell types. However, by crosslinking MHC
class II molecules, APCs can be activated by SAgs independently of T lymphocytes.
Recently, we showed that streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin A (SPEA) of
Streptococcus pyogenes stimulates an immunogenic APC phenotype with upregulated
costimulatory molecules and inflammatory cytokines. Additionally, we revealed
that SPEA triggers immunosuppressive programs in monocytes that facilitate the
accumulation of regulatory T cells (Tregs) in in vitro monocyte/CD4+ T-cell
cocultures. Immunosuppressive factors include anti-inflammatory interleukin 10
(IL-10), co-inhibitory surface molecule programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1),
and the inhibitory indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO)/kynurenine effector system. 
In the present study, we investigated the underlying mechanism of SPEA-stimulated
monocyte-mediated accumulation of Tregs. Blood-derived monocytes from healthy
donors were stimulated with SPEA for 48 h (SPEA-monocytes). For the evaluation of
SPEA-monocyte-mediated modulation of CD4+ T lymphocytes, SPEA was removed from
the culture through extensive washing of cells before adding allogeneic
CD3/CD28-activated T cells. Results: In coculture with allogeneic CD4+ T cells,
SPEA-monocytes mediate apoptosis of CD4+Foxp3- lymphocytes and accumulation of
CD4+Foxp3+ Tregs. PD-L1 and kynurenine are critically involved in the mediated
cell death because blocking both factors diminished apoptosis and decreased the
proportion of the CD25+/Foxp3+ Treg subpopulation significantly. Upregulation of 
PD-L1 and kynurenine as well as SPEA-monocyte-mediated effects on T cells depend 
on inflammatory IL-1β. Our study shows that monocytes activated by SPEA mediate
apoptosis of CD4+Foxp3- T effector cells through PD-L1 and kynurenine. CD4+Foxp3+
T cells are resistant to apoptosis and accumulate in SPEA-monocyte/CD4+ T-cell
coculture.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20163933 
PMCID: PMC6719222
PMID: 31412561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

