
1. Food Microbiol. 2019 Dec;84:103269. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2019.103269. Epub 2019 Jul 
13.

The occurrence and distribution characteristics of Cronobacter in diverse cereal 
kernels, flour, and flour-based products.

Lou X(1), Liu T(1), Zhang W(1), Yu H(1), Wang H(1), Song S(1), Chen Q(1), Fang
Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hangzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hangzhou, 310021, China.
(2)College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Zhejiang Gongshang
University, Hangzhou, 310018, China. Electronic address: zhgfang77@zjgsu.edu.cn.

Cronobacter was positive in cereals at a relatively high rate. In the present
study, we investigated the occurrence and characteristics of this pathogen
systematically in diverse cereals. All sampled food (N = 467) contained
Cronobacter with a high positive rate of 54.0%. The enumeration experiment showed
the concentration ranged from 0.3 to more than 110 MPN/100 g, and 87.9% of 127
samples were less than 10 MPN/100 g. There were significant differences
(p < 0.05) in positive rates for Cronobacter among cereal kernels (40.2%), cereal
flour (66.7%), cereal products made from raw cereal flour (87.6%), and cereal
products made from flour (ready-to-eat) (17.4%). The dominant Cronobacter species
was C. sakazakii and C. dublinensis, followed by C. malonaticus and C.
turicensis. Two interesting clusters with more than 90% similarities were
identiﬁed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). The C1 cluster (four
isolates) indicated these strains were derived from a common source and persisted
in the food production environment for an extended time. The C2 cluster (six
isolates) indicated the pathogen could be transmitted via cereal processing. Our 
research provided baseline data for Cronobacter in diverse cereals and was
helpful for understanding Cronobacter transmission. The results also indicate
that additional control measures should be developed to reduce the risk of
infection by these opportunistic pathogenic bacteria.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fm.2019.103269 
PMID: 31421791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

