
1. Int Microbiol. 2020 May;23(2):137-148. doi: 10.1007/s10123-019-00093-1. Epub 2019
Aug 20.

Composition of bacterial and archaeal communities in the rumen of dromedary camel
using cDNA-amplicon sequencing.

Rabee AE(1), Forster RJ(2), Elekwachi CO(2), Kewan KZ(3), Sabra E(4), Mahrous
HA(4), Khamiss OA(4), Shawket SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Animal and Poultry Nutrition Department, Desert Research Center, Cairo, Egypt.
rabee_a_m@yahoo.com.
(2)Lethbridge Research center, Lethbridge, AB, Canada.
(3)Animal and Poultry Nutrition Department, Desert Research Center, Cairo, Egypt.
(4)Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Research Institute, Sadat City
University, Sadat City, Egypt.

The camel is known to survive in harsh environmental conditions, due to its
higher digestive efficiency of high-fiber diets compared with other ruminants.
However, limited data are available on the microbial community in the rumen of a 
camel. In this study, the Illumina sequencing of V4 region of 16S rRNA genes
based on RNA isolation was employed to get insight into the bacterial and
archaeal communities associated with liquid and solid rumen fractions in eight
camels under different feeding systems. Camels in group C1 were fed Egyptian
clover hay plus concentrates mixture and camels of group C2 were fed fresh
Egyptian clover. The results showed that liquid fraction has higher operational
taxonomic units (OTUs) than solid fraction, and camel group C1 showed a higher
microbial diversity than C2. The UniFrac analysis indicated that the microbial
communities in camel groups are distinct. Moreover, phylum Firmicutes and
Bacteroidetes dominated the bacterial community and Candidatus
Methanomethylophilus dominated the archaeal community with a significant
difference in the relative abundance between camel groups. Dominant bacterial
genera were Prevotella, Fibrobacteres, Ruminococcus, and Butyrivibrio. There were
many negative and positive correlations between and within bacterial and archaeal
genera. The composition of microbial community in the rumen of a camel is similar
to other ruminants with differences in the abundance.

DOI: 10.1007/s10123-019-00093-1 
PMID: 31432356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

