
1. Chembiochem. 2020 Feb 17;21(4):523-530. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201900424. Epub 2019
Oct 21.

Substrate Flexibility of the Flavin-Dependent Dihydropyrrole Oxidases PigB and
HapB Involved in Antibiotic Prodigiosin Biosynthesis.

Couturier M(1), Bhalara HD(1), Chawrai SR(1), Monson R(2), Williamson NR(2),
Salmond GPC(2), Leeper FJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge,
CB2 1EW, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QW, UK.

In the biosynthesis of the tripyrrolic pigment prodigiosin, PigB is a predicted
flavin-dependent oxidase responsible for the formation of 2-methyl-3-amylpyrrole 
(MAP) from a dihydropyrrole. To prove which dihydropyrrole is the true
intermediate, both possibilities, 5-methyl-4-pentyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-pyrrole (5 a, 
resulting from transamination of the aldehyde of 3-acetyloctanal) and
2-methyl-3-pentyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-pyrrole (6, resulting from transamination of the
ketone), were synthesised. Only 5 a restored pigment production in a strain of
Serratia sp. ATCC 39006 blocked earlier in MAP biosynthesis. PigB is
membrane-associated and inactive when its transmembrane domain was deleted, but
HapB, its homologue in Hahella chejuensis, lacks the transmembrane domain and is 
active in solution. Two colourimetric assays for PigB and HapB were developed,
and the HapB-catalysed reaction was kinetically characterised. Ten analogues of
5 a were synthesised, varying in the C2 and C3 side chains, and tested as
substrates of HapB in vitro and for restoration of pigment production in Serratia
ΔpigD in vivo. All lengths of side chain tested at C3 were accepted, but only
short side chains at C2 were accepted. The knowledge that 5 a is an intermediate 
in prodigiosin biosynthesis and the ease of synthesis of analogues of 5 a makes a
range of prodigiosin analogues readily available by mutasynthesis.

© 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201900424 
PMCID: PMC7065143
PMID: 31433555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

