
1. Sensors (Basel). 2019 Aug 19;19(16). pii: E3597. doi: 10.3390/s19163597.

Use of Cyanobacterial Luminescent Bioreporters to Report on the Environmental
Impact of Metallic Nanoparticles.

Hurtado-Gallego J(1), Leganés F(1), Rosal R(2), Fernández-Piñas F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Ingeniería Química, Universidad de Alcalá, 28871 Alcalá de
Henares, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, 28029 Madrid, Spain. francisca.pina@uam.es.

Due to their ecological relevance, low cost, and easy maintenance, cyanobacteria 
have been used for bioreporter development. In this study, a battery of
cyanobacterial bioreporters has been used to assess the ecotoxicity of four
highly used metallic nanoparticles (NPs). The toxicity of these NPs was tested
using the bioreporter Nostoc CPB4337 (Anabaena CPB4337). As oxidative stress is a
primary toxic mechanism of metallic NPs, cyanobacterial reactive oxygen species
(ROS)-detecting bioreporters were used. Metallic NPs release metal ions, which
contribute to their toxic effect and the formation of ROS, so a metal-detecting
bioreporter was also used to detect the bioavailable metals. The results confirm 
that ROS production by NPs was due to the NPs per se and not by released
free-ions, which in fact were almost undetectable. Although the metal-detecting
bioreporter could not detect the dissolved metal ions, it was able to detect the 
metallic NPs themselves, indicating that this bioreporter may be useful to detect
them in the environment. ROS production varied depending on the growth medium or 
environmental matrices conditions and on the NP type. This work demonstrated the 
different levels of ROS production by metallic NPs and the importance of
nanotoxicology studies in real matrices.

DOI: 10.3390/s19163597 
PMCID: PMC6721232
PMID: 31430858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

