
1. Plast Surg Nurs. 2019 Jul/Sep;39(3):87-94. doi: 10.1097/PSN.0000000000000274.

Effect of Hydrogel Enriched With Alginate, Fatty Acids, and Vitamins A and E on
Pressure Injuries: A Case Series.

Rosa CA(1), Paggiaro AO, Carvalho VF.

Author information: 
(1)Cleide Aparecida Rosa, MSc, is a Nurse, Nursing Post Graduation, Guarulhos
University, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil. Andr√© Oliveira Paggiaro, MD, PhD, is a
Professor of Nursing Post Graduation, Guarulhos University, Sao Paulo, SP,
Brazil. Viviane Fernandes de Carvalho, PhD, is a Nurse and Professor of Nursing
Post Graduation, Guarulhos University, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Pressure injuries are a common kind of skin lesion that may be difficult to
treat. The objective of this study was to analyze the effect of hydrogel enriched
with alginate, fatty acids, and vitamins A and E in the treatment of pressure
injuries. This case series with 12-week follow-up included applying daily
dressings with hydrogel, maintaining a photographic record, using planimetry to
calculate the lesion area, and classifying the healing process using the Pressure
Ulcer Scale for Healing (PUSH). In addition, exudate collection from the ulcers
was performed in the beginning and after 12 weeks of treatment to determine the
dosage of metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 
(TIMP1). Of the 13 patients included in the study, 2 died and 11 were monitored
for 12 weeks. Only 1 patient showed full wound healing, but all patients showed a
significant 12.19% (p = .023) reduction in the lesion area. The PUSH score was
also significantly reduced from 15.9 to 10.54 (p = .0052). Relative to the dosage
of metalloproteinase and its inhibitor, there was a reduction in the level of
MMP9 and there was no change in the level of TIMP1. This study showed that
hydrogel enriched with alginate, fatty acids, and vitamins A and E provided
promising results for the treatment of pressure injuries by reducing the lesion
area, the general PUSH score, and the amount of MMP9 in the wounds'
microenvironment.

DOI: 10.1097/PSN.0000000000000274 
PMID: 31441788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

