
1. Turk J Phys Med Rehabil. 2017 Nov 27;63(4):307-312. doi: 10.5606/tftrd.2017.851. 
eCollection 2017 Dec.

Treatment of pressure ulcers with larvae of Lucilia sericata.

Polat E(1), Kutlubay Z(2), Sirekbasan S(1), Gökalp H(3), Akarırmak Ü(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Cerrahpaşa Medical Faculty, İstanbul
University, İstanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Cerrahpaşa Medical Faculty, İstanbul University,
İstanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Koç University Medical Faculty, İstanbul, Turkey.

Objectives: This study aims to investigate the use of the Lucilia sericata larvae
in patients with decubitus ulcers resistant to hyperbaric oxygen treatment,
vacuum-assisted closure, surgical debridement, and other conventional therapies.
Patients and methods: A total of 36 patients (21 females, 15 males; mean age 63.7
years; range 16 to 90 years) who were admitted to our hospital for decubitus
ulcers between February 2011 and July 2016 were included in our study. All
patients had one or more lesions in the sacral region, trochanteric area, dorsal 
region, or on the heel of the foot. Nine patients had spinal cord injuries, six
of them were injured during a car accident, and three of them had spinal cord
injuries due to gunshot. One patient had concomitant lung cancer, one had heart
failure, and two patients had a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Thirty three of 
36 patients were admitted to the wound therapy unit within the department of
emergency medicine, and three were admitted to the physical therapy and
rehabilitation clinic. For each patient, Lucilia sericata maggots were applied on
the lesions for 72 hours and, then, washed away. This procedure was repeated two 
times a week. Twenty nine patients (78.9%) had four to six sessions and seven
patients (21.1%) had eight to 12 sessions.
Results: Twenty nine lesions (78.9%) were Grade 2 and 3 and were completely
healed after four to eight treatment sessions, while seven lesions (21.1%) were
completely cured at the end of 10 to 14 sessions. There was complete clearance of
necrotic debris at the end of two sessions within the first week for 15 lesions, 
whereas 10 lesions (27.8%) were cured after four sessions within two weeks, seven
lesions (19.4%) within five sessions after three weeks, and four lesions (11.1%) 
were treated at the end of seven sessions for four weeks. All the necrotic crusts
over the surface of the ulcers were cleaned and bad odor of the lesions
disappeared.
Conclusion: Lucilia sericata larvae debridement is a rapid and effective
treatment option for the management of chronic decubitus ulcers which are
resistant to conventional therapies and other treatment modalities such as
hyperbaric oxygen, vacuum-assisted closure, and surgical debridement.

DOI: 10.5606/tftrd.2017.851 
PMCID: PMC6648072
PMID: 31453472 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declared no
conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship and/or publication of this
article.

