
1. Microbiologyopen. 2019 Oct;8(10):e910. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.910. Epub 2019 Aug 26.

Novel peptides screened by phage display peptide library can mimic epitopes of
the FnBPA-A protein and induce protective immunity against Staphylococcus aureus 
in mice.

Li JN(1), Wang H(1), Han YX(1), Zhao YT(1), Zhou HH(1), Xu J(1), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pathobiology and Disease Control, 
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei,
China.

Fibronectin-binding protein A (FnBPA) is a key adhesin of Staphylococcus aureus, 
and the protein binding to fibrinogen and elastin is mediated by its N-terminal A
domain. Thus, FnBPA-A has been considered a potential vaccine candidate, but the 
relevant epitopes are not fully understood. Here, purified rabbit anti-FnBPA-A
antibodies were produced and used to screen for peptides corresponding to or
mimicking the epitope of native FnBPA-A protein by using a phage random 12-mer
peptide library. After four rounds of panning, 25 randomly selected phage clones 
were detected by phage-ELISA and competition-inhibition ELISA. Then, eight
anti-rFnBPA-A antibody-binding phage clones were selected for sequencing, and six
different 12-mer peptides were displayed by these phages. Although these
displayed peptides shared no more than three consecutive amino acid residues
identical to the sequence of FnBPA-A, they could be recognized by the
FnBPA-A-specific antibodies in vitro and could induce specific antibodies against
FnBPA-A in vivo, suggesting that these displayed peptides were mimotopes of
FnBPA-A. Finally, the protective efficiencies of these mimotopes were
investigated by mouse vaccination and challenge experiments. Compared with that
of control group mice, the relative percent survival of mice immunized with phage
clones displaying a mimotope was 13.33% (C2 or C15), 0% (C8), 6.67% (C10), 26.67%
(C19 or 1:2 mixture of C23 and C19), 53.33% (C23), 33.33% (1:1 mixture of C23 and
C19), and 66.67% (2:1 mixture of C23 and C19). Overall, five peptides mimicking
FnBPA-A protein epitopes were obtained, and a partially protective immunity
against S. aureus infection could be stimulated by these mimotope peptides in
mice.

© 2019 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.910 
PMCID: PMC6813446
PMID: 31452334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

