
1. Br Poult Sci. 2019 Dec;60(6):708-715. doi: 10.1080/00071668.2019.1656799. Epub
2019 Aug 30.

Fabrication of olive leaf extract and hazelnut skin incorporated films to improve
the quality of nuggets during refrigerated and deep freeze storage.

Ozvural EB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Engineering, Cankiri Karatekin University, Cankiri, Turkey.

1. Olive leaf extract (OLE) and hazelnut skin (HS), which are known to have good 
antioxidant activity, were added into chicken nuggets in different ways. In the
first method, the nuggets were coated with sodium alginate-calcium chloride-based
coatings containing OLE and HS. In the second method, OLE and HS were directly
added into the nugget patties. Nuggets that did not contain any additive (C1) and
the samples prepared with the coating solution that did not include any additives
(C2) were assigned as controls.2. Nuggets were stored at two different
temperatures, either in a refrigerator (4°C) or in a deep freezer (-18°C) for
21 days and 90 days respectively. Moisture content (%), pH, antioxidant status
(TBARS), colour and microbial count (total mesophilic and psychrophilic aerobic
bacteria) analyses were carried out during storage.3. At the end of refrigerator 
storage (day 21), TBARS values for samples in which OLE and HS were directly
added were found to be lower than those with OLE and HS coatings (P < 0.05).
Total number of mesophilic and psychrophilic bacteria were found to be the lowest
in the treatment in which HS was directly incorporated into nugget patty
(P < 0.05).4. For frozen samples, application of a coating containing OLE and HS 
and direct addition of HS into patties were found to be effective in reducing
lipid oxidation. No microbial growth was determined in most of the samples stored
in the deep freezer.

DOI: 10.1080/00071668.2019.1656799 
PMID: 31468981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

