
1. Acta Oncol. 2020 Jan;59(1):33-39. doi: 10.1080/0284186X.2019.1657940. Epub 2019
Sep 3.

Circulating hematopoietic stem cells, endothelial progenitor cells and cancer
stem cells in hepatocellular carcinoma patients: contribution to diagnosis and
prognosis.

Zahran AM(1), Abdel-Rahim MH(2), Refaat A(3), Sayed M(4), Othman MM(5), Khalak
LMR(6), Hetta HF(2)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, South Egypt Cancer Institute, Assiut, Egypt.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut
University, Assiut, Egypt.
(3)Medical Oncology, South Egypt Cancer Institute, Assiut, Egypt.
(4)Radiotherapy Department, South Egypt Cancer Institute, Assiut University,
Assiut, Egypt.
(5)Radiodiagnosis Department, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut University, Assiut,
Egypt.
(6)Radiodiagnosis Department, South Egypt Cancer Institute, Assiut University,
Assiut, Egypt.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Background and aim: Circulating hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), circulating
endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) and cancer stem cells (CSCs) contribute to
tumor development and progression and can predict patient outcome. The aim of
this study was to investigate the frequency of circulating HSCs, EPCs and CSCs in
the peripheral blood of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and to
explore their potential prognostic significance for HCC patients.Methods: The
study included 30 HCC patients and 20 healthy controls. The HSCs and EPCs were
enumerated with CD45, CD34, CD133, CD144 markers, while CSCs were enumerated with
CD45, CD44, CD133 markers using flow cytometry.Results: The mean percentages of
circulating HSCs were significantly lower in HCC patients than the controls
(p = .001), whereas the mean percentages of EPCs within the HSCs subpopulation
were significantly higher in the HCC patients than the controls (p = .002). The
absolute count of CSCs within 100,000 peripheral blood mononuclear cells was
23.5 ± 3.4 in the HCC patients. Also, the mean percentages of circulating HSCs,
EPCs and the number of CSCs were significantly increased in patients with
multiple hepatic focal lesions than in patients with a single hepatic focal
lesion. Both circulating HSCs and EPCs showed significant positive correlation
with the level of AFP and with the numbers of CSCs. In the meantime, the numbers 
of CSCs revealed significant direct correlation with ALT, AST and AFP levels. The
one-year overall survival (OS) of the patients was 77.5%. High levels of CSCs,
HSCs and EPCs at diagnosis were all associated with worse outcome for the HCC
patients.Conclusions: Significant changes in the levels of the circulating HSCs, 
EPCs and CSCs occur in HCC. These changes help the diagnosis and the prediction
of HCC outcome, as higher levels of these cells are associated with worse OS.

DOI: 10.1080/0284186X.2019.1657940 
PMID: 31478425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

