
1. Molecules. 2019 Aug 29;24(17). pii: E3137. doi: 10.3390/molecules24173137.

Prediction of Structure and Molecular Interaction with DNA of BvrR, a
Virulence-Associated Regulatory Protein of Brucella.

Ramírez-González EA(1), Moreno-Lafont MC(1), Méndez-Tenorio A(2), Cancino-Díaz
ME(1), Estrada-García I(1), López-Santiago R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunología, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de México 11340, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Biotecnología y Bioinformática Genómica, Escuela Nacional de
Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de México 11340,
Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Inmunología, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de México 11340, Mexico.
rlopezsantiago@hotmail.com.

Brucellosis, also known as "undulant fever" is a zoonotic disease caused by
Brucella, which is a facultative intracellular bacterium. Despite efforts to
eradicate this disease, infection in uncontrolled domestic animals persists in
several countries and therefore transmission to humans is common. Brucella
evasion of the innate immune system depends on its ability to evade the
mechanisms of intracellular death in phagocytic cells. The BvrR-BvrS
two-component system allows the bacterium to detect adverse conditions in the
environment. The BvrS protein has been associated with genes of virulence
factors, metabolism, and membrane transport. In this study, we predicted the DNA 
sequence recognized by BvrR with Gibbs Recursive Sampling and identified the
three-dimensional structure of BvrR using I-TASSER suite, and the interaction
mechanism between BvrR and DNA with Protein-DNA docking and molecular dynamics
(MD) simulation. Based on the Gibbs recursive Sampling analysis, we found the
motif AAHTGC (H represents A, C, and T nucleotides) as a possible sequence
recognized by BvrR. The docking and EMD simulation results showed that C-terminal
effector domain of BvrR protein is likely to interact with AAHTGC sequence. In
conclusion, we predicted the structure, recognition motif, and interaction of
BvrR with DNA.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules24173137 
PMCID: PMC6749498
PMID: 31470504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

