
1. Hum Immunol. 2019 Nov;80(11):930-936. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2019.08.005. Epub
2019 Aug 29.

Genetic diversity of CD14, CD28, CTLA-4 and ICOS gene promoter polymorphism in
African and American sickle cell disease.

Seamans BN(1), Pellechio SL(2), Capria AL(3), Agyingi SE(4), Morenikeji OB(5),
Ojurongbe O(6), Thomas BN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA. Electronic address:
bns8068@rit.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA. Electronic address:
sxp1223@rit.edu.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA. Electronic address:
alc8941@rit.edu.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA. Electronic address:
agyingis@upstate.edu.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA. Electronic address:
obmhst@rit.edu.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Ladoke Akintola
University of Technology, Osogbo, Nigeria. Electronic address:
ojurongbe@lautech.edu.ng.
(7)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA. Electronic address:
bntsbi@rit.edu.

Variable immune response to external stimuli remains a major concern in sickle
cell disease (SCD), with such responses predicted to be contributors to disease
pathogenesis. Elucidating the diversity of host genes contributing to immune
response would assist to clarify differing outcomes among and between disease
groups. We hypothesize that there is a significant interethnic diversity in the
CD14 (rs2569190), CD28 (rs35593994), CTLA-4 (rs5742909) and ICOS (rs4404254) gene
polymorphisms among and between SCD groups. We genotyped single nucleotide
polymorphisms of the 4 loci among African and African American SCD and control
groups and between SCD groups. In all, 375 individuals from Mali (145 SCD and 230
controls) and 700 DNA samples from the United States (321 SCD and 379 controls)
were subjected to a PCR-RFLP assay. We found no intraethnic difference in
genotypic and allelic frequencies of the 4 loci among Africans and African
Americans, potentially significant in disease association studies, including a
similar observation for interethnic frequencies of CD28, CTLA-4 and ICOS genes,
but not CD14. The CD14 (rs2569190) gene promoter demonstrated a significant
difference (p < 0.02) between African and African American SCD groups, with the
mutant variant (-159 T/T) more frequent (p < 0.0002) in African American SCD
(38.9% versus 26.2%). The higher frequency of CD14 mutants among African
Americans without an accompanying defect in CD28, CTLA-4 and ICOS diversity
possibly indicates a defective innate response, driven by CD14, is untethered to 
downstream T cell differentiation or effector function. Additionally, we show
that CD28 (rs35593994) mutant variants have no impact on T cell differentiation, 
as the ICOS gene provides an alternative pathway to override this impairment. We 
conclude that in spite of the defect in CD14, T cell selection and
differentiation is unimpeded and a robust adaptive immune response initiated.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2019.08.005 
PMID: 31474499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

