
1. Onderstepoort J Vet Res. 2019 Aug 22;86(1):e1-e9. doi: 10.4102/ojvr.v86i1.1670.

Brucellosis and chlamydiosis seroprevalence in goats at livestock-wildlife
interface areas of Zimbabwe.

Bhandi S(1), Pfukenyi DM, Matope G, Murondoti A, Tivapasi M, Ndengu M, Scacchia
M, Bonfini B, De Garine-Wichatitsky M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Veterinary Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe; and, Research Platform Production and
Conservation in Partnership, Harare. solobande@yahoo.com.

In Zimbabwe, there have been no chlamydiosis and limited brucellosis studies in
goats. This study was conducted to determine the seroprevalence and risk factors 
of the two diseases in goats at three different livestock-wildlife interface
areas: porous, non-porous and non-interface in the south-eastern lowveld of
Zimbabwe. Collected sera (n = 563) were tested for Brucella antibodies using the 
Rose Bengal plate test (RBPT) and the complement fixation test (CFT); and for
Chlamydia abortus antibodies using the CFT. All tested goats were negative for
Brucella antibodies. Overall, chlamydial seroprevalence was 22%. The porous [c2 =
9.6, odds ratio (OR) = 2.6, p = 0.002] and non-porous (c2 = 37.5, OR = 5.8, p <
0.00001) interfaces were approximately three and six times more likely to be
chlamydial seropositive than the non-interface area, respectively. Chlamydial
seroprevalence was not associated with sex (c2 = 0.5, OR = 1.2, p = 0.5),
abortion history in female goats (c2 = 0.7, OR = 1.3, p = 0.4), keeping goats
with cattle (c2 = 0.2, OR = 1.5, p = 0.7) or flock size (c2 = 0.03, OR = 1.4, p =
0.9). Our study provides the first serological evidence of chlamydiosis in goats 
in Zimbabwe and the results suggest that proximity to wildlife is associated with
increased chlamydial seropositivity. Further studies are required to determine
the role of chlamydial infection on goat reproductive failure and that of
wildlife on C. abortus transmission to domestic ruminants.

DOI: 10.4102/ojvr.v86i1.1670 
PMCID: PMC6739518
PMID: 31478733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

