
1. Klin Lab Diagn. 2019;64(8):507-512. doi: 10.18821/0869-2084-2019-64-8-507-512.

[Dynamics of variability of microbiotes of the cavity of the mouth and the great 
intestinent of young men when changing the conditions of life.]

[Article in Russian]

Chervinets VM(1), Chervinets YV(1), Kravchuk ES(1), Ganina EB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tver State Medical University, Tver, 170100.

The purpose of the work is to determine the spectrum, quantity and frequency of
occurrence of microorganisms in the oral fluid and large intestine in healthy
young men under changes of living conditions. A survey was conducted of 14
nonresident young men, students of the 1st and 2nd courses, studying at Tver
State Medical University, which included questions about the place of birth,
living conditions, the presence of chronic diseases and the frequency of their
exacerbations over the past year, water and food regimes, physical exertion, the 
presence of bad habits and emotional stress, etc. The oral fluid and feces were
examined to determine the spectrum and amount of microbiota of the upper and
lower parts of the gastrointestinal tract. As the result of the survey, it was
found that the living conditions of all young men significantly worsened among
second-year students than freshmen. It was revealed that colon microbiota in
sophomores characterized by less diverse than those of first-year, despite of a
marked increase in the number of opportunistic pathogens (Stаphylocоccus spp.,
Strерtocoсcus spp., Clоstridium spp., Васillus spp., Кlebsiеlla spp.) over
resident microbes. It was found the decrease in the number and frequency of
occurrence of all microbial representatives in the oral microbiota of 2nd year
students in comparison with first-year. It was proved that the deterioration of
living conditions of nonresident students led to the increase in the number of
second-year students with dysbiotic changes in the intestinal microbiota from 86%
to 100%, mainly due to the increase in the number of persons with dysbiosis of II
and III degree.

DOI: 10.18821/0869-2084-2019-64-8-507-512 
PMID: 31479609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

