
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2019 Sep 28;29(9):1424-1433. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1906.06030.

Ralstonia pickettii Enhance the DDT Biodegradation by Pleurotus eryngii.

Purnomo AS(1), Maulianawati D(2), Kamei I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh
Nopember (ITS), Kampus ITS Sukolilo, Surabaya 60111, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Aquaculture, Faculty of Fisheries and Marine Science, Borneo
Tarakan University, Amal Lama No. 01, Tarakan Timur, Tarakan, 77123, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Forest and Environmental Science, Faculty of Agriculture,
University of Miyazaki, 1-1, Gakuen-kibanadai-nishi, Miyazaki 889-2192, Japan.

DDT is a hydrophobic organic pollutant, which can be bio-accumulated in nature
and have adverse consequences on the physical condition of humans and animals.
This study investigated the relationship between the white-rot fungus Pleurotus
eryngii and biosurfactantproducing bacterium Ralstonia pickettii associated with 
the degradation of DDT. The effects of R. pickettii on fungal development were
examined using in vitro confrontation assay on a potato dextrose agar (PDA)
medium. R. pickettii culture was added to the P. eryngii culture at 1, 3, 5, 7,
and 10 ml (1 ml ≈ 1.44 × 1013 CFU). After 7 d incubation, about 43% of the
initial DDT (12.5 μM) was degraded by the P. eryngii culture only. The
augmentation of 7 ml of R. pickettii culture revealed a more highly optimized
synergism with DDT degradation being approximately 78% and the ratio of
optimization 1.06. According to the confrontational assay, R. pickettii promoted 
the growth of P. eryngii towards the bacterial colony, with no direct contact
between the bacterial cells and mycelium (0.71 cm/day). DDD
(1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4- chlorophenyl) ethane), DDE
(1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl) ethylene), and DDMU (1-
chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl) ethylene) were identified as metabolic products,
indicating that the R. pickettii could enhance the DDT biodegradation by P.
eryngii.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1906.06030 
PMID: 31474097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

