
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2019 Sep 18;141(37):14510-14514. doi: 10.1021/jacs.9b06093. Epub
2019 Sep 10.

Substrate-Triggered Formation of a Peroxo-Fe2(III/III) Intermediate during Fatty 
Acid Decarboxylation by UndA.

Zhang B, Rajakovich LJ, Van Cura D, Blaesi EJ, Mitchell AJ, Tysoe CR, Zhu X(1),
Streit BR, Rui Z(1), Zhang W(1), Boal AK, Krebs C, Bollinger JM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , University of California
Berkeley , Berkeley , California 94720 , United States.

The iron-dependent oxidase UndA cleaves one C3-H bond and the C1-C2 bond of
dodecanoic acid to produce 1-undecene and CO2. A published X-ray crystal
structure showed that UndA has a heme-oxygenase-like fold, thus associating it
with a structural superfamily that includes known and postulated non-heme diiron 
proteins, but revealed only a single iron ion in the active site. Mechanisms
proposed for initiation of decarboxylation by cleavage of the C3-H bond using a
monoiron cofactor to activate O2 necessarily invoked unusual or potentially
unfeasible steps. Here we present spectroscopic, crystallographic, and
biochemical evidence that the cofactor of Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf-5 UndA is
actually a diiron cluster and show that binding of the substrate triggers rapid
addition of O2 to the Fe2(II/II) cofactor to produce a transient
peroxo-Fe2(III/III) intermediate. The observations of a diiron cofactor and
substrate-triggered formation of a peroxo-Fe2(III/III) intermediate suggest a
small set of possible mechanisms for O2, C3-H and C1-C2 activation by UndA; these
routes obviate the problematic steps of the earlier hypotheses that invoked a
single iron.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.9b06093 
PMCID: PMC6800569
PMID: 31487162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

