
1. J Cell Physiol. 2020 Mar;235(3):2590-2598. doi: 10.1002/jcp.29163. Epub 2019 Sep 
5.

Dysbiotic 1-carbon metabolism in cardiac muscle remodeling.

George AK(1), Singh M(1), Pushpakumar S(1), Homme RP(1), Hardin SJ(1), Tyagi
SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
Louisville, Kentucky.

Unless there is a genetic defect/mutation/deletion in a gene, the causation of a 
given disease is chronic dysregulation of gut metabolism. Most of the time, if
not always, starts within the gut; that is what we eat. Recent research shows
that the imbalance between good versus bad microbial population, especially in
the gut, causes systemic diseases. Thus, an appropriate balance of the gut
microbiota (eubiosis over dysbiosis) needs to be maintained for normal health
(Veeranki and Tyagi, 2017, Journal of Cellular Physiology, 232, 2929-2930).
However, during various diseases such as metabolic syndrome, inflammatory bowel
disease, diabetes, obesity, and hypertension the dysbiotic gut environment tends 
to prevail. Our research focuses on homocysteine (Hcy) metabolism that occupies a
center-stage in many biochemically relevant epigenetic mechanisms. For example,
dysbiotic bacteria methylate promoters to inhibit gene activities. Interestingly,
the product of the 1-carbon metabolism is Hcy, unequivocally. Emerging studies
show that host resistance to various antibiotics occurs due to inverton promoter 
inhibition, presumably because of promoter methylation. This results from
modification of host promoters by bacterial products leading to loss of host's
ability to drug compatibility and system sensitivity. In this study, we focus on 
the role of high methionine diet (HMD), an ingredient rich in red meat and
measure the effects of a probiotic on cardiac muscle remodeling and its
functions. We employed wild type (WT) and cystathionine beta-synthase
heterozygote knockout (CBS+/- ) mice with and without HMD and with and without a 
probiotic; PB (Lactobacillus) in drinking water for 16 weeks. Results indicate
that matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) activity was robust in CBS+/- fed with
HMD and that it was successfully attenuated by the PB treatment. Cardiomyocyte
contractility and ECHO data revealed mitigation of the cardiac dysfunction in
CBS+/-  + HMD mice treated with PB. In conclusion, our data suggest that
probiotics can potentially reverse the Hcy-meditated cardiac dysfunction.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.29163 
PMCID: PMC6899188
PMID: 31489638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

