
1. J Fish Dis. 2019 Nov;42(11):1493-1507. doi: 10.1111/jfd.13062. Epub 2019 Sep 3.

Identification of a mitochondrial-targeting secretory protein from Nocardia
seriolae which induces apoptosis in fathead minnow cells.

Chen J(1)(2)(3), Xia L(1)(2)(3), Wang W(1)(2)(3), Wang Z(1)(2)(3), Hou
S(1)(2)(3), Xie C(1)(2)(3), Cai J(1)(2)(3), Lu Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Institute of Guangdong Ocean University, Shenzhen City, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Fishery College of Guangdong Ocean University,
Zhanjiang City, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Engineering Research Center for Aquatic Animal Health
Assessment, Shenzhen Public Service Platform for Evaluation of Marine Economic
Animal Seedings, Shenzhen City, China.

Nocardia seriolae is the main pathogen responsible for fish nocardiosis. A
mitochondrial-targeting secretory protein (MTSP) 3141 with an N-terminal transit 
peptide (TP) from N. seriolae was predicted by bioinformatic analysis based on
the genomic sequence of the N. seriolae strain ZJ0503. However, the function of
the MTSP3141 and its homologs remains totally unknown. In this study, mass
spectrometry analysis of the extracellular products from N. seriolae proved that 
MTSP3141 was a secretory protein, subcellular localization research showed the
MTSP3141-GFP fusion protein co-localized with mitochondria in fathead minnow
(FHM) cells, the TP played an important role in mitochondria targeting, and only 
the TP located at N-terminus but not C-terminus can lead to mitochondria
directing. Moreover, quantitative assays of mitochondrial membrane potential
(ΔΨm) value, caspase-3 activity and apoptosis-related gene (Bcl-2, Bax, Bad, Bid 
and p53) mRNA expression suggested that cell apoptosis was induced in FHM cells
by the overexpression of both MTSP3141 and MTSP3141ΔTP (with the N-terminal TP
deleted) proteins. Taken together, the results of this study indicated that the
MTSP3141 of N. seriolae was a secretory protein, might target mitochondria,
induce apoptosis in host cells and function as a virulence factor.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.13062 
PMID: 31482589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

