
1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2019 Aug 29;12:204. doi: 10.1186/s13068-019-1545-1.
eCollection 2019.

Production of 2,3-butanediol from glucose and cassava hydrolysates by
metabolically engineered industrial polyploid Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Lee YG(1), Seo JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Center for Food and
Bioconvergence, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826 Republic of Korea.

Background: 2,3-Butanediol (2,3-BDO) is a valuable chemical for industrial
applications. Bacteria can produce 2,3-BDO with a high productivity, though most 
of their classification as pathogens makes them undesirable for the
industrial-scale production. Though Saccharomyces cerevisiae (GRAS microorganism)
was engineered to produce 2,3-BDO efficiently in the previous studies, their
2,3-BDO productivity, yield, and titer were still uncompetitive compared to those
of bacteria production. Thus, we propose an industrial polyploid S. cerevisiae as
a host for efficient production of 2,3-BDO with high growth rate, rapid sugar
consumption rate, and resistance to harsh conditions. Genetic manipulation tools 
for polyploid yeast had been limited; therefore, we engineered an industrial
polyploid S. cerevisiae strain based on the CRISPR-Cas9 genome-editing system to 
produce 2,3-BDO instead of ethanol.
Results: Endogenous genes coding for pyruvate decarboxylase and alcohol
dehydrogenase were partially disrupted to prevent declined growth rate and
C2-compound limitation. A bacterial 2,3-BDO-producing pathway was also introduced
in engineered polyploid S. cerevisiae. A fatal redox imbalance was controlled
through the heterologous NADH oxidase from Lactococcus lactis during the 2,3-BDO 
production. The resulting strain (YG01_SDBN) still retained the beneficial traits
as polyploid strains for the large-scale fermentation. The combination of
partially disrupted PDC (pyruvate decarboxylase) and ADH (alcohol dehydrogenase) 
did not cause the severe growth defects typically found in all pdc- or
adh-deficient yeast. The YG01_SDBN strain produced 178 g/L of 2,3-BDO from
glucose with an impressive productivity (2.64 g/L h). When a cassava hydrolysate 
was used as a sole carbon source, this strain produced 132 g/L of 2,3-BDO with a 
productivity of 1.92 g/L h.
Conclusions: The microbial production of 2,3-BDO has been limited to bacteria and
haploid laboratorial S. cerevisiae strains. This study suggests that an
industrial polyploid S. cerevisiae (YG01_SDBN) can produce high concentration of 
2,3-BDO with various advantages. Integration of metabolic engineering of the
industrial yeast at the gene level with optimization of fed-batch fermentation at
the process scale resulted in a remarkable achievement of 2,3-BDO production at
178 g/L of 2,3-BDO concentration and 2.64 g/L h of productivity. Furthermore,
this strain could make a bioconversion of a cassava hydrolysate to 2,3-BDO with
economic and environmental benefits. The engineered industrial polyploid strain
could be applicable to production of biofuels and biochemicals in large-scale
fermentations particularly when using modified CRISPR-Cas9 tools.

DOI: 10.1186/s13068-019-1545-1 
PMCID: PMC6714309
PMID: 31485270 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare they have 
no competing interests.

