
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2020 Feb;103:103492. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2019.103492. Epub 2019 
Sep 5.

The effects of CCL3, CCL4, CCL19 and CCL21 as molecular adjuvants on the immune
response to VAA DNA vaccine in flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus).

Xu H(1), Xing J(2), Tang X(3), Sheng X(1), Zhan W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology and Immunology of Aquatic Animals, KLMME, Ocean
University of China, 5 Yushan Road, Qingdao, 266003, China.
(2)Laboratory of Pathology and Immunology of Aquatic Animals, KLMME, Ocean
University of China, 5 Yushan Road, Qingdao, 266003, China; Laboratory for Marine
Fisheries Science and Food Production Processes, Qingdao National Laboratory for 
Marine Science and Technology, No. 1 Wenhai Road, Aoshanwei Town, Qingdao,
266071, China. Electronic address: xingjing@ouc.edu.cn.
(3)Laboratory of Pathology and Immunology of Aquatic Animals, KLMME, Ocean
University of China, 5 Yushan Road, Qingdao, 266003, China; Laboratory for Marine
Fisheries Science and Food Production Processes, Qingdao National Laboratory for 
Marine Science and Technology, No. 1 Wenhai Road, Aoshanwei Town, Qingdao,
266071, China.

The magnitude of the immune response induced by DNA vaccines depends on the
amount and type of antigen-presenting cells attracted to the injection site. In
our previous study, a DNA plasmid encoding the VAA gene of Vibrio anguillarum was
constructed and shown to confer moderate protection against V. anguillarum
challenge. To augment the protective efficacy of the VAA DNA vaccine and compare 
the adjuvant effects of CCL3, CCL4, CCL19 and CCL21, four bicistronic DNA
plasmids containing the VAA gene of V. anguillarum together with the gene
encoding the CCL3/CCL4/CCL19/CCL21 chemokines of flounder were successfully
constructed and administered to fish, and the immune response of the animals and 
the enhancement of immunoprotection by the four chemokines were investigated.
Vaccinated with pCCL3-VAA, pCCL4-VAA, pCCL19-VAA and pCCL21-VAA, flounder showed 
relative percent survivals of 62.16%, 83.78%, 78.38% and 72.97%, respectively,
higher than the relative survival of flounder immunized with pVAA (40.54%).
Compared with the pVAA group, the percentages of sIgM+, CD4-1+, and CD4-2+
lymphocytes and the levels of specific antibodies increased in pCCL3-VAA,
pCCL4-VAA, pCCL19-VAA and pCCL21-VAA injection groups; CCL4 and CCL19 induced
significantly higher levels of these parameters than CCL3 and CCL21 did. The
amount of V. anguillarum in liver, spleen and kidney of pCCL3-VAA-, pCCL4-VAA-,
pCCL19-VAA- and pCCL21-VAA-immunized flounder after V. anguillarum challenge was 
reduced compared to that in the pVAA group. Moreover, the co-expression of
CCL3/CCL4/CCL19/CCL21 up-regulated immune-related gene expression associated with
the local immune response. Our results indicate that CCL4 and CCL19 are promising
adjuvants for use in VAA DNA vaccine against V. anguillarum.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2019.103492 
PMID: 31494219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

