
1. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2019 Nov;79(7):475-483. doi:
10.1080/00365513.2019.1661007. Epub 2019 Sep 9.

Evaluation of a 10color protocol as part of a 2tube screening panel for flow
cytometric assessment of peripheral blood leukocytic subsets.

Gounari E(1), Tsavdaridou V(1), Ioakeimidou A(1), Haidich AB(2), Skoura L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Microbiology Laboratory, AHEPA University Hospital ,
Thessaloniki , Greece.
(2)Department of Hygiene, Faculty of Medicine, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki , Thessaloniki , Greece.

Peripheral blood (PB) immunophenotyping is commonly required for initial
evaluation of various suspected disease entities. Several approaches have been
proposed. The objective of this work is to explore the value of a 10color
protocol developed in our laboratory for flow cytometric assessment of PB
leukocytic subsets, as part of a 2tube screening panel. A combination of
CD16/CD56/CD34/CD33/CD19/CD4/CD8/CD3/CD20/CD45 antibodies in 1 tube was applied
routinely during flow cytometric analysis of PB samples for diagnostic purposes. 
The protocol was systematically complemented by a 2nd tube with anti-kappa,
anti-lambda, CD5, CD19, and CD45 antibodies for adults and selected pediatric
patients, and specifically oriented panels when necessary. 25 samples with no
detectable neoplastic PB involvement and 31 samples with a hematolymphoid
disorder were investigated retrospectively. The contribution of CD33 in the
separation of leukocytic populations, as well as the benefits from the
simultaneous assessment of CD20/CD19/CD45, CD16/CD56 and the detection of CD34+
cells were examined. The gating strategy with the use of CD33 provided additional
information in certain cases. The protocol enabled recognition of differential
expression of CD20 and CD45 in CD19+ cells with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
phenotype, overall evaluation of NK and NK like T cells, estimation of CD16-
granulocytes and CD56/CD16 expression in monocytes, as well as identification of 
minor cell subsets, such as CD34+ cells. The proposed 10color combination of
antibodies analyzed in a standardized manner can offer significant information in
the initial evaluation of PB samples, thus, guiding subsequent investigation if
needed.

DOI: 10.1080/00365513.2019.1661007 
PMID: 31497995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

