
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2019 Oct 30;85(22). pii: e01705-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01705-19. Print 2019 Nov 15.

Carbon Starvation Induces the Expression of PprB-Regulated Genes in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.

Wang C(#)(1), Chen W(#)(2), Xia A(2)(3), Zhang R(2)(3), Huang Y(3), Yang S(2)(3),
Ni L(4)(3), Jin F(4)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Physics, University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.
(2)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University 
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Quantitative Engineering Biology, Shenzhen Institute of 
Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China.
(4)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University 
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China
nilei@mail.ustc.edu.cn fjinustc@ustc.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Pseudomonas aeruginosa can cause severe infections in humans. This bacterium
often adopts a biofilm lifestyle that is hard to treat. In several previous
studies, the PprA-PprB two-component system (TCS), which controls the expression 
of type IVb pili, BapA adhesin, and CupE fimbriae, was shown to be involved in
biofilm formation (M. Romero, H. Silistre, L. Lovelock, V. J. Wright, K.-G. Chan,
et al., Nucleic Acids Res 46:6823-6840, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky324;
S. de Bentzmann, C. Giraud, C. S. Bernard, V. Calderon, F. Ewald F, et al., PLoS 
Pathog 8:e1003052, 2012, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1003052). However, 
signals or environmental conditions that can trigger the PprA-PprB TCS are still 
unknown, and the molecular mechanisms of PprB-mediated biofilm formation are
poorly characterized. Here, we report that carbon starvation stress (CSS) can
induce the expression of pprB and genes in the PprB regulon. CSS-induced pprB
transcription is mediated by the stress response sigma factor RpoS rather than
the two-component sensor PprA. We also observed a strong negative regulation of
PprB on the transcription of itself. Further experiments showed that PprB
overexpression greatly enhanced cell-cell adhesion (CCA) and cell-surface
adhesion (CSA) in P. aeruginosa Specifically, under the background of PprB
overexpression, both the BapA adhesin and CupE fimbriae displayed positive
effects on CCA and CSA, while the type IVb pili showed an unexpected negative
effect on CCA and no effect on CSA. In addition, expression of the PprB regulon
genes were significantly increased in 3-day colony biofilms, indicating a
possible carbon limitation state. The CSS-RpoS-PprB-Bap/Flp/CupE pathway
identified in this study provides a new perspective on the process of biofilm
formation in carbon-limited environments.IMPORTANCE Typically, the determination 
of the external signals that can trigger a regulatory system is crucial to
understand the regulatory logic and inward function of that system. The PprA-PprB
two-component system was reported to be involved in biofilm formation in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, but the signals triggering this system are unknown. In
this study, we found that carbon starvation stress (CSS) induces transcription of
pprB and genes in the PprB regulon through an RpoS-dependent pathway. Increased
PprB expression leads to enhanced cell-cell adhesion (CCA) and cell-surface
adhesion (CSA) in P. aeruginosa Both CCA and CSA are largely dependent on the Bap
secretion system and are moderately dependent on the CupE fimbriae. Our findings 
suggest that PprB reinforces the structure of biofilms under carbon-limited
conditions, and the Bap secretion system and CupE fimbriae are two potential
targets for biofilm treatment.

Copyright Â© 2019 Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01705-19 
PMCID: PMC6821963
PMID: 31492668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

