
1. J Immunol. 2019 Oct 1;203(7):1830-1844. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900291. Epub 2019 
Sep 6.

AhR Activation Leads to Massive Mobilization of Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells 
with Immunosuppressive Activity through Regulation of CXCR2 and MicroRNA
miR-150-5p and miR-543-3p That Target Anti-Inflammatory Genes.

Neamah WH(1), Singh NP(1), Alghetaa H(1), Abdulla OA(1), Chatterjee S(2), Busbee 
PB(1), Nagarkatti M(1), Nagarkatti P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208; and.
(2)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC 29208.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208; and prakash@mailbox.sc.edu.

The compound 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), an environmental
contaminant, is a potent ligand for aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). In the
current study, we made an exciting observation that naive C57BL/6 mice that were 
exposed i.p. to TCDD showed massive mobilization of myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs) in the peritoneal cavity. These MDSCs were highly immunosuppressive
and attenuated Con A-induced hepatitis upon adoptive transfer. TCDD
administration in naive mice also led to induction of several chemokines and
cytokines in the peritoneal cavity and serum (CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL11, CXCL1,
CXCL2, CXCL5, CXCL9, G-CSF, GM-CSF, VEGF, and M-CSF) and chemokine receptors on
MDSCs (CCR1, CCR5, and CXCR2). Treatment with CXCR2 or AhR antagonist in mice led
to marked reduction in TCDD-induced MDSCs. TCDD-induced MDSCs had high
mitochondrial respiration and glycolytic rate and exhibited differential microRNA
(miRNA) expression profile. Specifically, there was significant downregulation of
miR-150-5p and miR-543-3p. These two miRNAs targeted and enhanced
anti-inflammatory and MDSC-regulatory genes, including IL-10, PIM1, ARG2, STAT3, 
CCL11 and its receptors CCR3 and CCR5 as well as CXCR2. The role of miRs in MDSC 
activation was confirmed by transfection studies. Together, the current study
demonstrates that activation of AhR in naive mice triggers robust mobilization of
MDSCs through induction of chemokines and their receptors and MDSC activation
through regulation of miRNA expression. AhR ligands include diverse compounds
from environmental toxicants, such as TCDD, that are carcinogenic to dietary
indoles that are anti-inflammatory. Our studies provide new insights on how such 
ligands may regulate health and disease through induction of MDSCs.

Copyright Â© 2019 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900291 
PMCID: PMC6755129
PMID: 31492743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

