
1. Genes (Basel). 2019 Sep 6;10(9). pii: E687. doi: 10.3390/genes10090687.

The Genomics of Streptococcus Pneumoniae Carriage Isolates from UK Children and
Their Household Contacts, Pre-PCV7 to Post-PCV13.

Sheppard CL(1), Groves N(2), Andrews N(3), Litt DJ(2), Fry NK(2)(4), Southern
J(4), Miller E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Section, Public Health England-National Infection
Service, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5EQ, UK. carmen.sheppard@phe.gov.uk.
(2)Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Section, Public Health England-National Infection
Service, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5EQ, UK.
(3)Statistics, Modelling and Economics, Public Health England-National Infection 
Service, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5EQ, UK.
(4)Immunisation and Countermeasures, Public Health England-National Infection
Service, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5EQ, UK.

We used whole genome sequencing (WGS) analysis to investigate the population
structure of 877 Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates from five carriage studies
from 2002 (N = 346), 2010 (N = 127), 2013 (N = 153), 2016 (N = 187) and 2018 (N =
64) in UK households which covers the period pre-PCV7 to post-PCV13
implementation. The genomic lineages seen in the population were determined using
multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) and PopPUNK (Population Partitioning Using
Nucleotide K-mers) which was used for local and global comparisons. A Roary core 
genome alignment of all the carriage genomes was used to investigate phylogenetic
relationships between the lineages. The results showed an influx of previously
undetected sequence types after vaccination associated with non-vaccine
serotypes. A small number of lineages persisted throughout, associated with both 
non-vaccine and vaccine types (such as ST199), or that could be an example of
serotype switching from vaccine to non-vaccine types (ST177). Serotype 3
persisted throughout the study years, represented by ST180 and Global
Pneumococcal Sequencing Cluster (GPSC) 12; the local PopPUNK analysis and core
genome maximum likelihood phylogeny separated them into two clades, one of which 
is only seen in later study years. The genomic data showed that serotype
replacement in the carriage studies was mostly due to a change in genotype as
well as serotype, but that some important genetic lineages, previously associated
with vaccine types, persisted.

DOI: 10.3390/genes10090687 
PMCID: PMC6771020
PMID: 31500179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.L.S., D.J.L. and N.K.F. have contributed to
independent investigator-led research into the epidemiology of pneumococcal
disease in England which has been funded by pneumococcal vaccine companies.

