
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2019 Oct 1;95(10). pii: fiz131. doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiz131.

Substrate characteristic bacterial fatty acid production based on amino acid
assimilation and transformation in marine sediments.

Aepfler RF(1)(2), Bühring SI(2), Elvert M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Organic Geochemistry Group, MARUM-Center for Marine Environmental Sciences,
University of Bremen, Leobener Strasse 8, 28359 Bremen, Germany.
(2)Hydrothermal Geomicrobiology Group, MARUM-Center for Marine Environmental
Sciences, University of Bremen, Leobener Strasse 13, 28359 Bremen, Germany.

Polar lipid-derived fatty acids (PLFAs) and their stable carbon isotopes are
frequently combined to characterize microbial populations involved in the
degradation of organic matter, offering a link to biogeochemical processes and
carbon sources used. However, PLFA patterns derive from multiple species and may 
be influenced by substrate types. Here, we investigated such dependencies by
monitoring the transformation of position-specifically 13C-labeled amino acids
(AAs) in coastal marine sediments dominated by heterotrophic bacteria. Alanine
was assimilated into straight-chain FAs, while valine and leucine incorporation
led to the characteristic production of even- and odd-numbered iso-series FAs.
This suggests that identical microbial communities adjust lipid biosynthesis
according to substrate availability. Transformation into precursor molecules for 
FA biosynthesis was manifested in increased 13C recoveries of the corresponding
volatiles acetate, isobutyrate and isovalerate of up to 39.1%, much higher than
for PLFAs (<0.9%). A significant fraction of 13C was found in dissolved inorganic
carbon (up to 37.9%), while less was recovered in total organic carbon (up to
17.3%). We observed a clear discrimination against the carboxyl C, whereby C2 and
C3 positions were preferentially incorporated into PLFAs. Therefore,
position-specific labeling is an appropriate tool for reconstructing the
metabolic fate of protein-derived AAs in marine environments.

© FEMS 2019.

DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiz131 
PMID: 31504469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

