
1. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2019 Oct;143:183-189. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2019.09.010.
Epub 2019 Sep 5.

Grape (Vitis vinifera) VvDOF3 functions as a transcription activator and enhances
powdery mildew resistance.

Yu YH(1), Bian L(1), Wan YT(1), Jiao ZL(1), Yu KK(1), Zhang GH(1), Guo DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Henan Engineering Technology Research Center of Quality Regulation and
Controlling of Horticultural Plants, College of Forestry, Henan University of
Science and Technology, Luoyang, 471023, Henan Province, China.
(2)Henan Engineering Technology Research Center of Quality Regulation and
Controlling of Horticultural Plants, College of Forestry, Henan University of
Science and Technology, Luoyang, 471023, Henan Province, China. Electronic
address: guodalong@haust.edu.cn.

DOF proteins are plant-specific transcription factors that play vital roles in
plant development and defense responses. However, DOFs have primarily been
investigated in model plants, and fairly limited research has been performed on
grape (Vitis vinifera). In this study, we isolated and characterized a C2-C2 zinc
finger structural DOF gene, VvDOF3, from the grape cultivar Jingxiu. The VvDOF3
protein showed nuclear localization and transcriptional activation ability,
indicating that it functions as a transcription factor. The VvDOF3 gene was
rapidly induced by exogenous salicylic acid (SA), jasmonic acid (JA), and powdery
mildew infection. Overexpression of VvDOF3 in Arabidopsis thaliana enhanced
resistance to Golovinomyces cichoracearum. Expression of the SA-responsive
defense-related gene PR1 and the concentration of SA were up-regulated in
transgenic Arabidopsis plants overexpressing VvDOF3. Together, these data suggest
that VvDOF3 functions as a transcription factor in grape and enhances powdery
mildew resistance through the SA signaling pathway.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2019.09.010 
PMID: 31513952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

