
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2019 Aug 1;366(15). pii: fnz193. doi: 10.1093/femsle/fnz193.

Artificial neural network-assisted Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy for
differentiation of Salmonella serogroups and its application on epidemiological
tracing of Salmonella Bovismorbificans outbreak isolates from fresh sprouts.

Oberreuter H(1), Rau J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical and Veterinary Investigations Office (CVUA) Stuttgart, Schaflandstr. 
3/2, D-70736 Fellbach, Germany.

Salmonellae represent one of the most common bacterial infection reagents in both
humans and animals. For detection and epidemiological elucidation of Salmonella
infections, determination of Salmonella serotypes and differentiation between
different Salmonella isolates is crucial. In the first part of this study,
Artificial Neural Network (ANN)-assisted Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
spectroscopy was used to establish a method for subtyping Salmonella isolates
according to their serogroups. For this, 290 Salmonella strains from 35 different
serogroups were used to establish an ANN for differentiation between infrared
spectra of 10 different Salmonella serogroups (B, C1, C2-C3, D1/D2, E1, E4, F, G,
H, O:55) vs. the remaining serogroups. In the final ANN, sensitivity values
ranged between 90 and 100% for most of the 10 serogroups under investigation. In 
the second part of this study, ANN-assisted FTIR spectroscopy was applied for
epidemiological distinction of Salmonella Bovismorbificans outbreak isolates from
fresh sprouts vs. isolates from other sources. Four Salmonella Bovismorbificans
isolates from human and food origin in the context of a Southern German outbreak 
were successfully discriminated from other S. Bovismorbificans isolates from
various sources. ANN-assisted FTIR spectroscopy is thus an effective tool for
discrimination of Salmonella isolates at or even below serogroup level.

Â© FEMS 2019.

DOI: 10.1093/femsle/fnz193 
PMID: 31518396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

