
1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2019 Nov;97(11):1557-1566. doi: 10.1007/s00109-019-01834-5.
Epub 2019 Sep 16.

A combination of two novel VARS2 variants causes a mitochondrial disorder
associated with failure to thrive and pulmonary hypertension.

Chin HL(1)(2), Goh DL(3)(4), Wang FS(3)(4), Tay SKH(3)(4), Heng CK(3)(4), Donnini
C(5), Baruffini E(6), Pines O(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Khoo Teck Puat-National University Children's Medical Institute, National
University Health Systems (NUHS), Singapore, Singapore. hui-lin_chin@nuhs.edu.sg.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
Hospital, National University of Singapore, 5 Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore,
119074, Singapore. hui-lin_chin@nuhs.edu.sg.
(3)Khoo Teck Puat-National University Children's Medical Institute, National
University Health Systems (NUHS), Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
Hospital, National University of Singapore, 5 Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore,
119074, Singapore.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Life Sciences and Environmental Sustainability,
University of Parma, Parco Area delle Scienze 11/A, 43124, Parma, Italy.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Life Sciences and Environmental Sustainability,
University of Parma, Parco Area delle Scienze 11/A, 43124, Parma, Italy.
enrico.baruffini@unipr.it.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, IMRIC, Faculty of Medicine,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(8)NUS-HUJ-CREATE Program and the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Yong
Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore.

The VARS2 gene encodes a mitochondrial valyl-transfer RNA synthetase which is
used in mitochondrial translation. To date, several patients with VARS2
pathogenic variants have been described in the literature. These patients have
features of lactic acidosis with encephalomyopathy. We present a case of an
infant with lactic acidosis, failure to thrive, and severe primary pulmonary
hypertension who was found to be a compound heterozygote for two novel VARS2
variants (c.1940C>T, p.(Thr647Met) and c.2318G>A, p.(Arg773Gln)). The patient was
treated with vitamin supplements and a carbohydrate-restricted diet. The lactic
acidosis and failure to thrive resolved, and he showed good growth and
development. Functional studies and molecular analysis employed a yeast model
system and the VAS1 gene (yeast homolog of VARS2). VAS1 genes harboring either
one of two mutations corresponding to the two novel variants in the VARS2 gene,
exhibited partially reduced function in haploid yeast strains. A combination of
both VAS1 variant alleles in a diploid yeast cell exhibited a more significant
decrease in oxidative metabolism-dependent growth and in the oxygen consumption
rate (reminiscent of the patient who carries two mutant VARS2 alleles). Our
results demonstrate the pathogenicity of the biallellic novel VARS2 variants. KEY
MESSAGES: • A case of an infant who is a compound heterozygote for two novel
VARS2 variants. • This infant displayed lactic acidosis, failure to thrive, and
pulmonary hypertension. • Treatment of the patient with a carbohydrate-restricted
diet resulted in good growth and development. • Studies with the homologous yeast
VAS1 gene showed reduced function of corresponding single mutant in haploid yeast
strains. • A combination of both VAS1 variant alleles in diploid yeast exhibited 
a more significant decrease in function, thereby confirming the pathogenicity of 
the biallellic novel VARS2 variants.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-019-01834-5 
PMID: 31529142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

