
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020 Jan 1;142:181-190. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.09.090.
Epub 2019 Sep 13.

Structural and biochemical studies of phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase from
Acinetobacter baumannii with dephospho-coenzyme A and coenzyme A.

Gupta A(1), Singh PK(1), Sharma P(1), Kaur P(1), Sharma S(1), Singh TP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.
(2)Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India. Electronic address: tpsingh.aiims@gmail.com.

Phosphopantetheine adenylyl transferase catalyzes a rate limiting penultimate
step of the multistep reaction which produces coenzyme A (CoA) as a final
product. CoA is required as an essential cofactor in a number of metabolic
reactions. Therefore inhibiting the function of this enzyme will lead to cell
death in bacteria. Acinetobacter baumannii is multi drug resistant pathogen and
causes infections in immunocompromised patients. AbPPAT has been cloned,
expressed, purified and crystallized and structures of two complexes of AbPPAT
with dephospho coenzyme A (dPCoA) and coenzyme A (CoA) have been determined. Both
dPCoA and CoA molecules are observed in the substrate binding site of AbPPAT. A
comparison with the structures of the complexes of PPAT from other species shows 
that the orientations of dPCoA are identical in all the structures. On the other 
hand, as observed from the structures of the complexes of CoA with PPAT, the
orientations of CoA are found to differ considerably. This shows that the
substrates occupy identical positions in the substrate binding sites of enzymes
whereas the positions of inhibitors may differ. The binding studies carried out
using fluorescence method and surface plasmon resonance techniques showed that
binding affinity of CoA towards AbPPAT is nearly three times higher than that of 
dPCoA.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.09.090 
PMID: 31525415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

