
1. J Lipid Res. 2020 Feb;61(2):192-204. doi: 10.1194/jlr.RA119000317. Epub 2019 Sep 
23.

A nematode sterol C4α-methyltransferase catalyzes a new methylation reaction
responsible for sterol diversity.

Zhou W(1), Fisher PM(1), Vanderloop BH(1), Shen Y(1), Shi H(1), Maldonado AJ(2), 
Leaver DJ(1)(2), Nes WD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX.
(2)Department of Biology, Geology, and Physical Sciences, Sul Ross State
University, Alpine, TX.

Comment in
    J Lipid Res. 2020 Feb;61(2):129-132.

Primitive sterol evolution plays an important role in fossil record
interpretation and offers potential therapeutic avenues for human disease
resulting from nematode infections. Recognizing that C4-methyl stenol products
[8(14)-lophenol] can be synthesized in bacteria while C4-methyl stanol products
(dinosterol) can be synthesized in dinoflagellates and preserved as sterane
biomarkers in ancient sedimentary rock is key to eukaryotic sterol evolution. In 
this regard, nematodes have been proposed to convert dietary cholesterol to
8(14)-lophenol by a secondary metabolism pathway that could involve sterol C4
methylation analogous to the C2 methylation of hopanoids (radicle-type mechanism)
or C24 methylation of sterols (carbocation-type mechanism). Here, we
characterized dichotomous cholesterol metabolic pathways in Caenorhabditis
elegans that generate 3-oxo sterol intermediates in separate paths to lophanol
(4-methyl stanol) and 8(14)-lophenol (4-methyl stenol). We uncovered alternate
C3-sterol oxidation and Δ7 desaturation steps that regulate sterol flux from
which branching metabolite networks arise, while lophanol/8(14)-lophenol
formation is shown to be dependent on a sterol C4α-methyltransferse (4-SMT) that 
requires 3-oxo sterol substrates and catalyzes a newly discovered 3-keto-enol
tautomerism mechanism linked to S-adenosyl-l-methionine-dependent methylation.
Alignment-specific substrate-binding domains similarly conserved in 4-SMT and
24-SMT enzymes, despite minimal amino acid sequence identity, suggests divergence
from a common, primordial ancestor in the evolution of methyl sterols. The
combination of these results provides evolutionary leads to sterol diversity and 
points to cryptic C4-methyl steroidogenic pathways of targeted convergence that
mediate lineage-specific adaptations.-.

Copyright © 2020 Zhou et al. Published by The American Society for Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.RA119000317 
PMCID: PMC6997595
PMID: 31548366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

