
1. Conserv Physiol. 2019 Sep 16;7(1):coz040. doi: 10.1093/conphys/coz040.
eCollection 2019.

Reference intervals for blood-based biochemical analytes of southern Beaufort Sea
polar bears.

Fry TL(1), Friedrichs KR(1), Atwood TC(2), Duncan C(3), Simac K(2), Goldberg
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, USA.
(2)Alaska Science Center, US Geological Survey, Anchorage, AK, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO,
USA.

Accurate reference intervals (RIs) for commonly measured blood-based analytes are
essential for health monitoring programmes. Baseline values for a panel of
analytes can be used to monitor physiologic and pathophysiologic processes such
as organ function, electrolyte balance and protein catabolism. Our reference
population includes 651 serum samples from polar bears (Ursus maritimus) from the
southern Beaufort Sea (SB) subpopulation sampled in Alaska, USA, between 1983 and
2016. To establish RI for 13 biochemical analytes, we defined specific criteria
for characterizing the reference population and relevant subgroups. To account
for differences in seasonal life history characteristics, we determined separate 
RI for the spring and fall seasons, when prey availability and energetic
requirements of bears differ. We established RI for five subgroups in spring
based on sex, age class and denning status, and three subgroups in fall based on 
sex and age class in females only. Alkaline phosphatase activities were twice as 
high in subadult as in adult polar bears in spring (z males = 4.08, P
males < 0.001, z females = 3.90, P females < 0.001) and did not differ between
seasons. Denning females had significantly higher glucose concentrations than
non-denning females (z = 4.94, P < 0.001), possibly reflecting differences in
energy expenditure during lactation. A total of 10 of the 13 analytes differed
significantly between seasons in either males or females; however, the
physiologic importance of these differences may be minimal. Establishing these
RIs allows for temporal monitoring of polar bear health in the SB and may prove
useful for assessing and monitoring additional polar bear subpopulations in a
changing Arctic environment.

DOI: 10.1093/conphys/coz040 
PMCID: PMC6748785
PMID: 31548889 

