
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Sep 14;20(18). pii: E4566. doi: 10.3390/ijms20184566.

Invariant Natural Killer T-Cells and Total CD1d Restricted Cells Differentially
Influence Lipid Metabolism and Atherosclerosis in Low Density Receptor Deficient 
Mice.

VanderLaan PA(1), Reardon CA(2), Cabana VG(3), Wang CR(4), Getz GS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
pvanderl@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
reardon@uchicago.edu.
(3)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
vencabana@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University, 633 Clark 
St, Evanston, IL 60208, USA. chyung-ru-wang@northwestern.edu.
(5)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
getz@bsd.uchicago.edu.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a distinct subset of lymphocytes that bridge the
innate and adaptive immune response and can be divided into type I invariant NKT 
cells (iNKT) and type II NKT cells. The objective of this study is to examine the
effects of NKT cell on lipid metabolism and the initiation and progression of
atherosclerosis in LDL receptor deficient (LDLR-/-) mice. Mice were fed an
atherogenic diet for 4 or 8 weeks and plasma lipids, lipoproteins, and
atherosclerosis were measured. The selective absence of iNKT cells in
Jα18-/-LDLR-/- mice led to an increase in plasma cholesterol levels in female
mice. Transgenic Vα14tg/LDLR-/- mice with elevated numbers of iNKT cells had
increased late atherosclerosis of the innominate artery, though absence of either
iNKT cells or all NKT cells and other CD1d expressing cells had varying effects
on atherosclerotic lesion burden in the ascending aortic arch and aortic root.
These studies not only highlight the potential modulatory role played by NKT
cells in atherosclerosis and lipid metabolism, but also raise the possibility
that divergent roles may be played by iNKT and CD1d restricted cells such as type
II NKT cells or other CD1d expressing cells.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20184566 
PMCID: PMC6770011
PMID: 31540125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

