
1. mSphere. 2019 Sep 25;4(5). pii: e00391-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00391-19.

Multiple β-Lactam Resistance Gene-Carrying Plasmid Harbored by Klebsiella
quasipneumoniae Isolated from Urban Sewage in Japan.

Suzuki Y(1), Ida M(2), Kubota H(2), Ariyoshi T(2), Murakami K(2), Kobayashi M(2),
Kato R(2), Hirai A(2), Suzuki J(2), Sadamasu K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Public Health,
Tokyo, Japan ysuzuki@vmas.kitasato-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Public Health,
Tokyo, Japan.

The continuous emergence of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE)
presents a great public health challenge. Mitigation of CPE spread in the
environment is crucial, particularly from a One Health perspective. Here we
describe the isolation of CPE strain SNI47 from influent water of a sewage
treatment plant in Japan. SNI47 was identified as Klebsiella quasipneumoniae
subsp. quasipneumoniae by phylogenetic analysis and was resistant to β-lactams,
including carbapenems. Of four plasmids detected from SNI47, the 185,311-bp
IncA/C2 plasmid (pTMSNI47-1), which carried 10 drug resistance genes, including
genes for four β-lactamases (bla CTX-M-2, bla DHA-1, bla KHM-1, and bla OXA-10), 
was transferred to Escherichia coli J53 via conjugation. The MICs of all tested
β-lactams for the transconjugant were higher than for the recipient. We
constructed recombinant plasmids, into which each β-lactamase gene was inserted, 
and used them to transform E. coli DH5α cells, demonstrating that KHM-1 enhanced 
carbapenem resistance. In addition, these β-lactamases were responsible for a
wide-spectrum β-lactam resistance acquisition with mutual compensation. KHM-1,
recognized as a rare type of metallo-β-lactamase, was detected in a transferable 
plasmid, from a sewage treatment plant, involved in horizontal gene transfer. The
detection of such plasmids raises a health risk alarm for CPE
dissemination.IMPORTANCE In our investigation of urban wastewater in Japan,
carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella quasipneumoniae subsp. quasipneumoniae was
isolated that carried the pTMSNI47-1 plasmid, which carries four β-lactamase
genes and has transferability among Enterobacteriaceae pTMSNI47-1 was found to
encode a rarely reported carbapenemase, KHM-1. Cooperative effects of
β-lactamases encoded by pTMSNI47-1 appeared to have broad-spectrum resistance to 
β-lactams. The detection of the KHM-1 gene in urban wastewater suggests that such
a rare antimicrobial resistance (AMR) gene can be pooled in the environment,
potentially emerging as an AMR determinant in a pathogen. When the number of
β-lactamase resistance genes is increased in one plasmid, the transfer of this
plasmid can confer broad-spectrum resistance to β-lactams, even if the individual
gene confers narrow-spectrum resistance. The present study adds important
information about the potential risk of sewage treatment plants as reservoirs and
environmental suppliers of AMR genes, contributing to the public health from a
One Health perspective.

Copyright © 2019 Suzuki et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00391-19 
PMCID: PMC6763765
PMID: 31554719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

