
1. Environ Microbiol. 2019 Nov;21(11):4425-4445. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.14809. Epub 
2019 Oct 17.

Adaptation of the Alphaproteobacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides to stationary
phase.

McIntosh M(1), Eisenhardt K(1), Remes B(1), Konzer A(2), Klug G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie und Molekularbiologie, IFZ,
Justus-Liebig-Universität, 35392, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung
Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Exhaustion of nutritional resources stimulates bacterial populations to adapt
their growth behaviour. General mechanisms are known to facilitate this
adaptation by sensing the environmental change and coordinating gene expression. 
However, the existence of such mechanisms among the Alphaproteobacteria remains
unclear. This study focusses on global changes in transcript levels during growth
under carbon-limiting conditions in a model Alphaproteobacterium, Rhodobacter
sphaeroides, a metabolically diverse organism capable of multiple modes of growth
including aerobic and anaerobic respiration, anaerobic anoxygenic photosynthesis 
and fermentation. We identified genes that showed changed transcript levels
independently of oxygen levels during the adaptation to stationary phase. We
selected a subset of these genes and subjected them to mutational analysis,
including genes predicted to be involved in manganese uptake, polyhydroxybutyrate
production and quorum sensing and an alternative sigma factor. Although these
genes have not been previously associated with the adaptation to stationary
phase, we found that all were important to varying degrees. We conclude that
while R. sphaeroides appears to lack a rpoS-like master regulator of stationary
phase adaptation, this adaptation is nonetheless enabled through the impact of
multiple genes, each responding to environmental conditions and contributing to
the adaptation to stationary phase.

© 2019 The Authors. Environmental Microbiology published by Society for Applied
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.14809 
PMID: 31579997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

