
1. Infect Immun. 2019 Nov 18;87(12). pii: e00703-19. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00703-19.
Print 2019 Dec.

Changes in the Molecular and Functional Phenotype of Bovine Monocytes during
Theileria parva Infection.

Bastos RG(1), Sears K(1)(2), Dinkel KD(1), Knowles DP(1), Fry LM(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology & Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, USA.
(2)Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Microbiology & Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, USA
lindsay.fry@ars.usda.gov.
(4)Animal Disease Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Pullman, Washington, USA.

Theileria parva is the causative agent of East Coast fever (ECF), a tick-borne
disease that kills over a million cattle each year in sub-Saharan Africa. Immune 
protection against T. parva involves a CD8+ cytotoxic T cell response to
parasite-infected cells. However, there is currently a paucity of knowledge
regarding the role played by innate immune cells in ECF pathogenesis and T. parva
control. Here, we demonstrate an increase in intermediate monocytes (CD14++
CD16+) with a concomitant decrease in the classical (CD14++ CD16-) and
nonclassical (CD14+ CD16+) subsets at 12 days postinfection (dpi) during lethal
infection but not during nonlethal T. parva infection. Ex vivo analyses of
monocytes demonstrated upregulation of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β) and tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) mRNA and increased nitric oxide production during
T. parva lethal infection compared to nonlethal infection at 10 dpi.
Interestingly, no significant differences in peripheral blood parasite loads were
observed between lethally and nonlethally infected animals at 12 dpi. In vitro
stimulation with T. parva schizont-infected cells or Escherichia coli
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) resulted in significant upregulation of IL-1β production
by monocytes from lethally infected cattle compared to those from nonlethally
infected animals. Strikingly, monocytes from lethally infected animals produced
significant amounts of IL-10 mRNA after stimulation with T. parva
schizont-infected cells. In conclusion, we demonstrate that T. parva infection
leads to alterations in the molecular and functional phenotypes of bovine
monocytes. Importantly, since these changes primarily occur in lethal infection, 
they can serve as biomarkers for ECF progression and severity, thereby aiding in 
the standardization of protection assessment for T. parva candidate vaccines.

Copyright © 2019 Bastos et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00703-19 
PMCID: PMC6867863
PMID: 31570561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

