
1. Biochemistry. 2020 Sep 1;59(34):3157-3168. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00517. Epub
2019 Oct 4.

Catalytic Cycle of Neisseria meningitidis CMP-Sialic Acid Synthetase Illustrated 
by High-Resolution Protein Crystallography.

Matthews MM(1), McArthur JB(1), Li Y(1), Yu H(1), Chen X(1), Fisher AJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, California 95616,
United States.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, Davis,
California 95616, United States.

Cytidine 5'-monophosphate (CMP)-sialic acid synthetase (CSS) is an essential
enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of carbohydrates and glycoconjugates
containing sialic acids, a class of α-keto acids that are generally terminal key 
recognition residues by many proteins that play important biological and
pathological roles. The CSS from Neisseria meningitidis (NmCSS) has been commonly
used with other enzymes such as sialic acid aldolase and/or sialyltransferase in 
synthesizing a diverse array of compounds containing sialic acid or its naturally
occurring and non-natural derivatives. To better understand its catalytic
mechanism and substrate promiscuity, four NmCSS crystal structures trapped at
various stages of the catalytic cycle with bound substrates, substrate analogues,
and products have been obtained and are presented here. These structures suggest 
a mechanism for an "open" and "closed" conformational transition that occurs as
sialic acid binds to the NmCSS/cytidine-5'-triphosphate (CTP) complex. The closed
conformation positions critical residues to help facilitate the nucleophilic
attack of sialic acid C2-OH to the α-phosphate of CTP, which is also aided by two
observed divalent cations. Product formation drives the active site opening,
promoting the release of products.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00517 
PMCID: PMC7814854
PMID: 31583886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

