
1. J Med Chem. 2019 Nov 14;62(21):9772-9791. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.9b01198. Epub
2019 Oct 21.

Chemical Space Exploration around Thieno[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4(3H)-one Scaffold Led
to a Novel Class of Highly Active Clostridium difficile Inhibitors.

Shao X(1), AbdelKhalek A(2), Abutaleb NS(2), Velagapudi UK(1), Yoganathan S(1),
Seleem MN(2)(3), Talele TT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences
, St. John's University , Queens , New York 11439-0001 , United States.
(2)Department of Comparative Pathobiology , Purdue University College of
Veterinary Medicine , West Lafayette , Indiana 47907-2027 , United States.
(3)Purdue Institute of Inflammation, Immunology, and Infectious Disease , West
Lafayette , Indiana 47907-2027 , United States.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the leading cause of
healthcare-associated infection in the United States. Therefore, development of
novel treatments for CDI is a high priority. Toward this goal, we began in vitro 
screening of a structurally diverse in-house library of 67 compounds against two 
pathogenic C. difficile strains (ATCC BAA 1870 and ATCC 43255), which yielded a
hit compound, 2-methyl-8-nitroquinazolin-4(3H)-one (2) with moderate potency (MIC
= 312/156 μM). Optimization of 2 gave lead compound 6a
(2-methyl-7-nitrothieno[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4(3H)-one) with improved potency (MIC =
19/38 μM), selectivity over normal gut microflora, CC50s > 606 μM against
mammalian cell lines, and acceptable stability in simulated gastric and
intestinal fluid. Further optimization of 6a at C2-, N3-, C4-, and C7-positions
resulted in a library of >50 compounds with MICs ranging from 3 to 800 μM against
clinical isolates of C. difficile. Compound 8f (MIC = 3/6 μM) was identified as a
promising lead for further optimization.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.9b01198 
PMID: 31584822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

