
1. Proteins. 2020 Mar;88(3):449-461. doi: 10.1002/prot.25822. Epub 2019 Oct 16.

Experimental comparison of energy landscape features of ubiquitin family
proteins.

Nandi T(1), Yadav A(1), Ainavarapu SRK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai, India.

Small ubiquitin-related modifiers (SUMO1 and SUMO2) are ubiquitin family
proteins, structurally similar to ubiquitin, differing in terms of their amino
acid sequence and functions. Therefore, they provide a great platform for
investigating sequence-structure-stability-function relationship. Here, we used
chemical denaturation in comparing the folding-unfolding pathways of the SUMO
proteins with their structural homologue ubiquitin (UF45W-pseudo wild-type [WT]
tryptophan variant) with structurally analogous tryptophan mutations (SUMO1
[S1F66W], SUMO2 [S2F62W]). Equilibrium denaturation studies report that ubiquitin
is the most stable protein among the three. The observed denaturant-dependent
folding rates of SUMOs are much lower than ubiquitin and primarily exhibit a
two-state folding pathway unlike ubiquitin, which has a kinetic folding
intermediate. We hypothesize that, as SUMO proteins start off as slow folders,
they avoid stabilizing their folding intermediates and the presence of which
might further slow-down their folding rates. The denaturant-dependent unfolding
of ubiquitin is the fastest, followed by SUMO2, and slowest for SUMO1. However,
the spontaneous unfolding rate constant is the lowest for ubiquitin (~40 times), 
and similar for SUMOs. This correlation between thermodynamic stability and
kinetic stability is achieved by having different unfolding transition state
positions with respect to the solvent-accessible surface area, as quantified by
the Tanford β u values: ubiquitin (0.42) > SUMO2 (0.20) > SUMO1 (0.16). The
results presented here highlight the unique energy landscape features which help 
in optimizing the folding-unfolding rates within a structurally homologous
protein family.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.25822 
PMID: 31587348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

