
1. Biomedica. 2019 Sep 1;39(3):513-523. doi: 10.7705/biomedica.4131.

Methicillin resistance and biofilm production in clinical isolates of
Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase-negative Staphylococcus in México

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

García A(1), Martínez C, Juárez RI, Téllez R, Paredes MA, Herrera MDR, Giono S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Bacteriología Médica, Departamento de Microbiología, Escuela
Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de
México, México. anhait_ayerim@hotmail.com.

Introduction: Infections associated with health care caused by S. aureus and
coagulase-negative Staphylococci multi-resistant to antibiotics cause a high
epidemiological impact due to their high morbidity and mortality. Biofilm
formation, which has been associated with antimicrobial resistance, can also
occur. Objectives: To determine methicillin resistance and to quantify the
biofilm production to establish if there is a relationship in clinical isolates
of S. aureus and coagulase-negative Staphylococci. Material and methods: A total 
of 11 strains of S. aureus and 12 of coagulase-negative Staphylococci were
studied. Methicillin resistance was determined with cefoxitin discs and the
Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute (CSLI), 2018 reference values. Biofilm
production was quantified by the crystal violet method. The mecA and icaADBC
genes were identified by PCR. A bivariate analysis was performed with chi-square 
(c2) and Cramér’s V statistical tests, using SPSS™, version 20.0 software.
Results: Nine S. aureus strains were methicillin-resistant and two were
sensitive. Eight coagulase-negative Staphylococci strains were resistant and four
were sensitive. The mecA genotype was found in eight of the nine S. aureus
resistant strains and six of eight resistant coagulase-negative Staphylococci.
All strains formed biofilms. Ten strains of S. aureus and 11 of
coagulase-negative Staphylococci presented the icaADCB genotype. No association
was found between methicillin-resistance and biofilm formation. Conclusions:
Cefoxitin is enough to define the resistance phenotype and is associated with the
mecA genotype. All strains formed biofilms and were related to the presence of
the icaADCB operon. Biofilm formation and methicillin resistance were independent
features in both groups of strains.

Publisher: Introducción. Las infecciones por Staphylococcus aureus y
Staphylococcus coagulasa negativa multirresistentes a los antibióticos y
asociadas con la atención en salud tienen un gran impacto epidemiológico por su
alta morbimortalidad; además, se han relacionado con la formación de
biopelículas, lo cual también se asocia con la resistencia a los antimicrobianos.
Objetivo. Determinar la resistencia a la meticilina y cuantificar la producción
de biopelículas para establecer su posible relación con los aislamientos clínicos
de S. aureus y Staphylococcus coagulasa negativa. Materiales y métodos. Se
estudiaron 11 cepas de S. aureus y 12 de Staphylococcus coagulasa negativa. La
resistencia a la meticilina se determinó con discos de cefoxitina tomando como
valores de referencia los estándares del Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute 
(CLSI) de 2018. La producción de biopelícula se cuantificó con cristal violeta.
Los genes mecA e icaADBC se identificaron mediante reacción en cadena de la
polimerasa (PCR), y se hizo un análisis bivariado con la prueba de ji al cuadrado
y el coeficiente V de Cramér, utilizando el programa SPSS™, versión 20.0.
Resultados. Nueve cepas de S. aureus fueron resistentes a la meticilina (SARM) y 
dos fueron sensibles. Ocho cepas de Staphylococcus coagulasa negativa fueron
resistentes y cuatro fueron sensibles. El genotipo mecA se encontró en ocho de
las nueve cepas de S. aureus y en seis de las ocho de Staphylococcus coagulasa
negativa resistentes a meticilina. Todas las cepas formaron biopelícula. Diez
cepas de S. aureus y 11 de Staphylococcus coagulasa negativa presentaron el
genotipo icaADCB. No se encontró asociación entre la resistencia a meticilina y
la formación de biopelícula. Conclusiones. La cefoxitina es suficiente para
determinar el fenotipo resistente a meticilina y se asoció con el genotipo mecA. 
Las cepas resistentes a la meticilina y poseedoras del gen mecA pueden presentar 
un mecanismo de resistencia alterno. Los dos grupos de cepas formadoras de
biopelícula se relacionaron con la presencia del operón icaADCB. La formación de 
biopelícula y la resistencia a la meticilina se expresaron como características
independientes en los dos grupos de cepas.
DOI: 10.7705/biomedica.4131 
PMCID: PMC7357358
PMID: 31584765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

