
1. Proteins. 2020 Mar;88(3):527-539. doi: 10.1002/prot.25831. Epub 2019 Nov 12.

Protonation state of the selectivity filter of bacterial voltage-gated sodium
channels is modulated by ions.

Damjanovic A(1), Chen AY(2), Rosenberg RL(3), Roe DR(4), Wu X(4), Brooks BR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Department of Physics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Department of Biology, Earlham College, Richmond, Indiana.
(4)Laboratory of Computational Biology, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

The selectivity filter (SF) of bacterial voltage-gated sodium channels consists
of four glutamate residues arranged in a C4 symmetry. The protonation state
population of this tetrad is unclear. To address this question, we simulate the
pore domain of bacterial voltage-gated sodium channel of Magnetococcus sp. (Nav
Ms) through constant pH methodology in explicit solvent and free energy
perturbation calculations. We find that at physiological pH the fully
deprotonated as well as singly and doubly protonated states of the SF appear
feasible, and that the calculated pKa decreases with each additional bound ion,
suggesting that a decrease in the number of ions in the pore can lead to
protonation of the SF. Previous molecular dynamics simulations have suggested
that protonation can lead to a decrease in the conductance, but no pKa
calculations were performed. We confirm a decreased ionic population of the pore 
with protonation, and also observe structural symmetry breaking triggered by
protonation; the SF of the deprotonated channel is closest to the C4 symmetry
observed in crystal structures of the open state, while the SF of protonated
states display greater levels of asymmetry which could lead to transition to the 
inactivated state which possesses a C2 symmetry in the crystal structure. We
speculate that the decrease in the number of ions near the mouth of the channel, 
due to either random fluctuations or ion depletion due to conduction, could be a 
self-regulatory mechanism resulting in a nonconducting state that functionally
resembles inactivated states.

Â© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.25831 
PMID: 31589792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

