
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 Dec;95:336-348. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.10.007. Epub
2019 Oct 3.

Multiomics analyses reveal that NOD-like signaling pathway plays an important
role against Streptococcus agalactiae in the spleen of tilapia.

Wu W(1), Li L(2), Liu Y(2), Huang T(2), Liang W(2), Chen M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Science and Technology College of Guangxi University, Nanning, Guangxi,
530004, PR China.
(2)Guangxi Academy of Fishery Sciences, Nanning, Guangxi, 530005, PR China.
(3)Animal Science and Technology College of Guangxi University, Nanning, Guangxi,
530004, PR China; Guangxi Academy of Fishery Sciences, Nanning, Guangxi, 530005, 
PR China. Electronic address: cmbegin990919@163.com.

Streptococcus aglactiae(GBS) infection in tilapia is a serious global disease
that causes significant production loss. Here, we studied the role of GBS in the 
spleen and the spleen's response against the pathogen through dual RNA-seq and
proteome technology. Animals were divided into three groups: control, virulent
treated (HN016), and attenuated treated (YM001). Spleen samples were collected
and analysis when a disease outbreak. Dual RNA-seq result showed the virulence
factor genes of GBS, included CAMP factor, PGK, OCT, enolase, scpB, Sip, bca,
were upregulation. downregulation of GapA, cylE, OCT, scpB, C5AP, rlmB, hly, FBP,
in HN016 and YM001. But for proteomic, OCT and bca were downregulation, the
others were upregulation. For host transcriptome KEGG analysis showed, the
NOD-like receptor signaling pathway (NLRs) and TOLL-like receptor signaling
pathway (TLRs) were upreguoation in HN016 infected fish than the control fish;
But for proteome KEGG, only the NLRS was up, the TLRS was not change. Compared
with YM001 infected fishes, for transcriptome, NLRs and TLRs in infected HN016
fishes were significance rise (p < 0.01); for proteome, the NLRs was up
(p < 0.05), but TLRs was no change.Analysis of pathogen-host interaction showed
that the peptidoglycan (PNG), CD2, LCK, and host's Zap70 were involved in the
regulation of NLRs; PNG, LCK, and ZAP70 were involved in the regulation of TRLs. 
Conclusion: the virulent strain HN016 and attenuated strainYM001 differed in the 
quantity of virulence factors. In tilapia's innate immune system, NLRs was the
main defense factors, but bacteria avoided the host defense through TLRs.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.10.007 
PMID: 31586680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

