
1. Nutr Cancer. 2020;72(7):1200-1210. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2019.1670217. Epub 2019 
Oct 8.

Bromelain plus peroxidase reduces non-Hodgkin lymphoma progression in invivo via 
up-regulation of antioxidant enzymes and modulating apoptotic protein expression.

Debnath R(1), Majumder D(1), Nath P(1), Ghosh D(2), Maiti D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Physiology, Tripura University, Immunology Microbiology
Lab, Suryamaninagar, Tripura, India.
(2)Department of Zoology, Tripura University, Suryamaninagar, Tripura, India.

Aim: Pineapple (Ananas comosus (L.) Merr.) is a good source of bromelain (B) and 
also contain peroxidase. The objective of this study is isoaltion of bromelain
plus peroxidase (BP) from the pineapple fruit to evaluate the anticancer activity
of BP from the pineapple fruit of Tripura, compared to commercial bromelain
against ascitic Dalton's lymphoma cells (DLA) in mice. Methods: By acetone
precipitation BP was isolated from the pineapple. Animals bearing DLA, receive B 
and BP orally for 15 alternative days. Apoptotic proteins are assayed using
western blot. Results: BP treated mice showed recover of hemoglobin and WBC count
compared to control lymphoma animal. The animal showed significant reduction of
body weight due to reduced tunor load and elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
production, elevated levels of vitamin C and vitamin E and other antioxidants in 
blood after BP treatment. Histology of liver and kidney also shows restored
architecture in BP treated animal compared to only B treated group. BP treatment 
upregulates the cytochrome C, BAD, and BAX protein and downregulates the Bcl-2
and NF-kÎ² occuring upon BP treatment in the DLA cells collected from lymphoma
animal. This induce the apoptosis of DLA cells in lymphoma animal and reduce the 
tumor load. Conclusion: The present findings suggest that BP from pineapple
improves the survival of the induced lymphoma animal compared to only B which may
be used as therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1080/01635581.2019.1670217 
PMID: 31591915 

