
1. Arch Microbiol. 2020 Mar;202(2):257-267. doi: 10.1007/s00203-019-01739-4. Epub
2019 Oct 11.

Induction of defense-related genes in tomato plants after treatments with the
biocontrol agents Pseudomonas chlororaphis ToZa7 and Clonostachys rosea IK726.

Kamou NN(1), Cazorla F(2), Kandylas G(3), Lagopodi AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Pathology, School of Agriculture, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, P.O. Box 269, 541 24, Thessaloniki, Greece. nnkamou@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Malaga, Malaga, Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Plant Pathology, School of Agriculture, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, P.O. Box 269, 541 24, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Pseudomonas chlororaphis ToZa7 is a promising biocontrol agent possessing
valuable characteristics and reducing disease severity caused by Fusarium
oxysporum f. sp. radicis-lycopersici (Forl) in tomato. In this study, the
strain's ability to induce three pathogenesis-related (PR) genes (PR-1a, GLUA,
and CHI3) in tomato, was studied using quantitative reverse transcription PCR.
The genes PR-1a and GLUA were up-regulated after 120 h exposure to P. chororaphis
ToZa7 (15.22- and 13.11-fold, respectively), as compared to the untreated
control, without challenge inoculation by the pathogen. To study the effects of
individual or combined application of P. chororaphis ToZa7 and the compatible
biocontrol fungus Clonostachys rosea IK726, challenged with the pathogen, the
expression patterns of the above three PR genes were monitored, in tomato roots. 
Expression of PR1-a was noteworthy, especially 48 h after challenge inoculation, 
when C. rosea IK726 alone or in combination with P. chororaphis, ToZa7 was
pre-inoculated on tomato roots (38.53-fold and 53.74-fold, respectively).
Expression of PR1-a, 72 h after challenge inoculation, was the highest in P.
chororaphis ToZa7, among biocontrol treatments. Expression of CHI3 was much
lower, while up-regulation of GLUA was overall not observed. Confocal laser
scanning microscopy of intact tomato roots and bacterial counts of superficially 
disinfected roots revealed, for the first time, that P. chororaphis ToZa7
colonizes the exterior as well as the internal tissues.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-019-01739-4 
PMID: 31605156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

