
1. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2020 Feb;84(2):228-237. doi:
10.1080/09168451.2019.1677142. Epub 2019 Oct 10.

Electrostatic interactions at the interface of two enzymes are essential for
two-step alkane biosynthesis in cyanobacteria.

Chang M(1), Shimba K(2), Hayashi Y(2), Arai M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Cyanobacterial alkane biosynthesis is catalyzed by acyl-(acyl carrier protein
(ACP)) reductase (AAR) and aldehyde-deformylating oxygenase (ADO) in a two-step
reaction. AAR reduces acyl-ACPs to fatty aldehydes, which are then converted by
ADO to alkanes, the main components of diesel fuel. Interaction between AAR and
ADO allows AAR to efficiently deliver the aldehyde to ADO. However, this
interaction is poorly understood. Here, using analytical size-exclusion
chromatography (SEC), we show that electrostatic interactions play an important
role in the binding of the two enzymes. Alanine-scanning mutagenesis at charged
residues around the substrate entry site of ADO revealed that E201A mutation
greatly reduced hydrocarbon production. SEC measurement of the mutant
demonstrated that E201 of ADO is essential for the AAR-ADO interaction. Our
results suggest that AAR binds to the substrate entrance gate of ADO and thereby 
facilitates the insertion of the reactive and relatively insoluble aldehyde into 
the hydrophobic channel of ADO.Abbreviations: AAR: acyl-ACP reductase; ACP: acyl 
carrier protein; ADO: aldehyde-deformylating oxygenase; ASA: solvent accessible
surface area; BSA: bovine serum albumin; CD: circular dichroism; DMSO: dimethyl
sulfoxide; DTT: dithiothreitol; GC-MS: gas chromatography-mass spectrometer;
HPLC: high-performance liquid chromatography; IPTG:
isopropyl-Î²-D-thiogalactoside; MRE: mean residue ellipticity; NpAAR: AAR from
Nostoc punctiforme PCC 73102; NpADO: ADO from Nostoc punctiforme PCC 73102;
PmADO: ADO from Prochlorococcus marinus MIT 9313; SDS-PAGE: sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; SeAAR: AAR from Synechococcus
elongatus PCC 7942; SeADO: ADO from Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942; SEC:
size-exclusion chromatography; TeAAR: AAR from Thermosynechococcus elongatus
BP-1; TeADO: ADO from Thermosynechococcus elongatus BP-1; UV: ultraviolet.

DOI: 10.1080/09168451.2019.1677142 
PMID: 31601165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

