
1. Langmuir. 2019 Dec 3;35(48):15739-15750. doi: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b02609. Epub 
2019 Oct 24.

Interactions between Mutant Bacterial Lipopolysaccharide (LPS-Ra) Surface Layers:
Surface Vesicles, Membrane Fusion, and Effect of Ca2+and Temperature.

Redeker C(1), Briscoe WH(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry , University of Bristol , Cantock's Close, Bristol BS8 1TS
, United Kingdom.

Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) are a major component of the protective outer membrane 
of Gram-negative bacteria. Understanding how the solution conditions may affect
LPS-containing membranes is important to optimizing the design of antibacterial
agents (ABAs) which exploit electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions to disrupt
the bacteria membrane. Here, interactions between surface layers of LPS (Ra
mutants) in aqueous media have been studied using a surface force apparatus
(SFA), exploring the effects of temperature and divalent Ca2+ cations.
Complementary dynamic light scattering (DLS) characterization suggests that
vesicle-like aggregates of diameter ∼28-80 nm are formed by LPS-Ra in aqueous
media. SFA results show that LPS-Ra vesicles adsorb weakly onto mica in pure
water at room temperature (RT) and the surface layers are readily squeezed out as
the two surfaces approach each other. However, upon addition of calcium (Ca2+)
cations at near physiological concentration (2.5 mM) at RT, LPS multilayers or
deformed LPS liposomes on mica are observed, presumably due to bridging between
LPS phosphate groups and between LPS phosphates and negatively charged mica
mediated by Ca2+, with a hard wall repulsion at surface separation D0 ∼ 30-40 nm.
At 40 °C, which is above the LPS-Ra β-α acyl chain melting temperature (Tm = 36
°C), fusion events between the surface layers under compression could be
observed, evident from δD ∼ 8-10 nm steps in the force-distance profiles
attributed to LPS-bilayers being squeezed out due to enhanced fluidity of the LPS
acyl-chain, with a final hard wall surface separation D0 ∼ 8-10 nm corresponding 
to the thickness of a single bilayer confined between the surfaces. These
unprecedented SFA results reveal intricate structural responses of LPS surface
layers to temperature and Ca2+, with implications to our fundamental
understanding of the structures and interactions of bacterial membranes.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b02609 
PMID: 31604373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

