
1. J Immunol. 2019 Dec 1;203(11):2959-2969. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900431. Epub 2019
Oct 16.

Multiple Signaling Pathways Involved in Human Dendritic Cell Maturation Are
Affected by the Fungal Quorum-Sensing Molecule Farnesol.

Vivas W(1), Leonhardt I(1)(2), Hünniger K(1)(3), Häder A(1), Marolda A(1), Kurzai
O(4)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fungal Septomics, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection
Biology-Hans Knöll Institute, 07745 Jena, Germany.
(2)Center for Sepsis Control and Care, Jena University Hospital, 07747 Jena,
Germany; and.
(3)Institute for Hygiene and Microbiology, University of Würzburg, 97080
Würzburg, Germany.
(4)Fungal Septomics, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection
Biology-Hans Knöll Institute, 07745 Jena, Germany;
okurzai@hygiene.uni-wuerzburg.de.

The quorum-sensing molecule farnesol is produced by the opportunistic human
fungal pathogen Candida albicans Aside from its primary function of blocking the 
transition from yeast to hyphal morphotype, it has an immunomodulatory role on
human dendritic cells (DC) through the alteration of surface markers, cytokine
secretion, and their ability to activate T cells. Nonetheless, the molecular
mechanisms by which farnesol modulates DC differentiation and maturation remained
unknown. In this study, we demonstrate through transcriptional and functional
assays that farnesol influences several signaling pathways during DC
differentiation and in response to TLR agonists. In particular, farnesol
increases the expression of the Ag-presenting glycoprotein CD1d through the
nuclear receptors PPARγ and RARα, as well as p38 MAPK. However, the higher
expression of CD1d did not confer these DC with an enhanced capacity to activate 
CD1d-restricted invariant NKT cells. In the presence of farnesol, there is
reduced secretion of the Th1-inducing cytokine, IL-12, and increased release of
proinflammatory cytokines, as well as the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. These
changes are partially independent of nuclear receptor activity but, in the case
of TNF-α and IL-10, dependent on NF-κB and MAPK pathways. Interestingly, renewal 
of the IL-12/IL-10 milieu restores the ability of farnesol-differentiated DC to
activate invariant NKT, Th1, and FOXP3+ regulatory T cells. Our results show that
farnesol modulates nuclear receptors, NF-κB, and MAPK-signaling pathways, thereby
impairing the capacity of DC to activate several T cells subsets and potentially 
conferring C. albicans, an advantage in overcoming DC-mediated immunity.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900431 
PMID: 31619536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

