
1. Front Oncol. 2019 Sep 20;9:685. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00685. eCollection 2019.

4T1 Mammary Carcinoma Colonization of Metastatic Niches Is Accelerated by
Obesity.

Evangelista GCM(1)(2), Salvador PA(1), Soares SMA(1), Barros LRC(3), Xavier
FHDC(1), Abdo LM(1), Gualberto ACM(1), Macedo GC(1), Clavijo-Salomon MA(2)(3),
Gameiro J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases and Obesity,
Department of Parasitology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Federal University of
Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology, Department of Immunology, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Center of Translational Research in Oncology, Institute of Cancer of São
Paulo, ICESP, University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, Brazil.

Breast cancer (BC) remains the leading cause of cancer-related deaths among
women, and the chances to develop it are duplicated by obesity. Still, the impact
of obesity during BC progression remains less understood. We investigated the
role of obesity in tumor progression using the murine model of 4T1 mammary
carcinoma in BALB/c female mice, previously high-fat-diet (HFD) fed. HFD induced 
obesity, metabolic impairment, and high serum and fat leptin levels. After
injection of 4T1-cells, HFD-mice accelerated tumor progression and metastasis.
4T1-cells found within HFD-mice metastatic niches presented higher clonogenic
potential. 4T1-cells treated in vitro with fat-conditioned medium derived from
HFD-mice, increased migration capacity through CXCL12 and CCL25 gradients. In
HFD-mice, the infiltration and activation of immune cells into tumor-sentinel
lymph nodes was overall reduced, except for activated CD4+ T cells expressing low
CD25 levels. Within the bone marrow, the levels of haematopoiesis-related IL-6
and TNF-α decreased after 4T1-cells injection in HFD-mice whereas increased in
the controls, suggesting that upregulation of both cytokines, regardless of the
tumor, is disrupted by obesity. Finally, the expression of genes for leptin,
CXCR4, and CCR9 (receptors of CXCL12 and CCL25, respectively) was negatively
correlated with the infiltration of CD8 T cells in human triple-negative BC
tumors from obese patients compared to non-obese. Together, our data present
early evidence of systemic networks triggered by obesity that promote BC
progression to the metastatic niches. Targeting these pathways might be useful to
prevent the rapid BC progression observed among obese patients.

Copyright © 2019 Evangelista, Salvador, Soares, Barros, Xavier, Abdo, Gualberto, 
Macedo, Clavijo-Salomon and Gameiro.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00685 
PMCID: PMC6764084
PMID: 31616626 

