
1. Nat Microbiol. 2019 Dec;4(12):2538-2551. doi: 10.1038/s41564-019-0583-6. Epub
2019 Oct 14.

Evasion of autophagy mediated by Rickettsia surface protein OmpB is critical for 
virulence.

Engstr√∂m P(1), Burke TP(2), Mitchell G(2), Ingabire N(2)(3), Mark KG(2),
Golovkine G(2), Iavarone AT(4), Rape M(2)(5), Cox JS(2), Welch MD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA, USA. pengstrom@berkeley.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA, USA.
(3)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX,
USA.
(4)QB3/Chemistry Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA, USA.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA, USA. welch@berkeley.edu.

Rickettsia are obligate intracellular bacteria that evade antimicrobial autophagy
in the host cell cytosol by unknown mechanisms. Other cytosolic pathogens block
different steps of autophagy targeting, including the initial step of
polyubiquitin-coat formation. One mechanism of evasion is to mobilize actin to
the bacterial surface. Here, we show that actin mobilization is insufficient to
block autophagy recognition of the pathogen Rickettsia parkeri. Instead, R.
parkeri employs outer membrane protein B (OmpB) to block ubiquitylation of the
bacterial surface proteins, including OmpA, and subsequent recognition by
autophagy receptors. OmpB is also required for the formation of a capsule-like
layer. Although OmpB is dispensable for bacterial growth in endothelial cells, it
is essential for R. parkeri to block autophagy in macrophages and to colonize
mice because of its ability to promote autophagy evasion in immune cells. Our
results indicate that OmpB acts as a protective shield to obstruct autophagy
recognition, thereby revealing a distinctive bacterial mechanism to evade
antimicrobial autophagy.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-019-0583-6 
PMCID: PMC6988571
PMID: 31611642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

