
1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Nov 22;294(47):17988-18001. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011059. Epub
2019 Oct 15.

Staphylopine and pseudopaline dehydrogenase from bacterial pathogens catalyze
reversible reactions and produce stereospecific metallophores.

McFarlane JS(1), Zhang J(2), Wang S(2), Lei X(2), Moran GR(3), Lamb AL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
66045.
(2)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of
Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Department of Chemical Biology, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering,
and Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, 
China.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Loyola University, Chicago, Illinois
60660.
(4)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
66045 lamb@ku.edu.

Pseudopaline and staphylopine are opine metallophores biosynthesized by
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus, respectively. The final step in
opine metallophore biosynthesis is the condensation of the product of a
nicotianamine (NA) synthase reaction (i.e. l-HisNA for pseudopaline and d-HisNA
for staphylopine) with an α-keto acid (α-ketoglutarate for pseudopaline and
pyruvate for staphylopine), which is performed by an opine dehydrogenase. We
hypothesized that the opine dehydrogenase reaction would be reversible only for
the opine metallophore product with (R)-stereochemistry at carbon C2 of the
α-keto acid (prochiral prior to catalysis). A kinetic analysis using stopped-flow
spectrometry with (R)- or (S)-staphylopine and kinetic and structural analysis
with (R)- and (S)-pseudopaline confirmed catalysis in the reverse direction for
only (R)-staphylopine and (R)-pseudopaline, verifying the stereochemistry of
these two opine metallophores. Structural analysis at 1.57-1.85 Å resolution
captured the hydrolysis of (R)-pseudopaline and allowed identification of a
binding pocket for the l-histidine moiety of pseudopaline formed through a
repositioning of Phe-340 and Tyr-289 during the catalytic cycle. Transient-state 
kinetic analysis revealed an ordered release of NADP+ followed by staphylopine,
with staphylopine release being the rate-limiting step in catalysis. Knowledge of
the stereochemistry for opine metallophores has implications for future studies
involving kinetic analysis, as well as opine metallophore transport, metal
coordination, and the generation of chiral amines for pharmaceutical development.

© 2019 McFarlane et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011059 
PMCID: PMC6879343
PMID: 31615895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

