
1. Biomol NMR Assign. 2020 Apr;14(1):19-23. doi: 10.1007/s12104-019-09914-w. Epub
2019 Oct 14.

NMR chemical shift assignment of a constitutively active fragment of the
antitermination protein LicT.

Yang Y(1), Declerck N(2)(3), Déméné H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biochimie Structurale (CBS), INSERM, CNRS, Univ Montpellier,
Montpellier, France.
(2)Centre de Biochimie Structurale (CBS), INSERM, CNRS, Univ Montpellier,
Montpellier, France. Nathalie.Declerck@cbs.cnrs.fr.
(3)INRA, departement MICA, 78352, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
Nathalie.Declerck@cbs.cnrs.fr.
(4)Centre de Biochimie Structurale (CBS), INSERM, CNRS, Univ Montpellier,
Montpellier, France. Helene.demene@cbs.cnrs.fr.

LicT belongs to an essential family of bacterial antitermination proteins which
bind to nascent mRNAs in order to stimulate transcription of sugar-metabolizing
operons. As most of other antitermination proteins involved in carbohydrate
metabolism, LicT is composed of a N-terminal RNA-binding module (CAT) and two
homologous regulatory modules (PRD1 and PRD2). The activity of the CAT effector
module is controlled by antagonist phosphorylations by the phosphotransferase
system on conserved histidines of the two C-terminal PRDs in response to
available carbon sources. Previous studies on truncated and mutant constructs
have provided partial structural insight into the mechanism of signal
transduction between the N-terminal RNA-binding domain and the two regulation
modules. However, no structure at atomic resolution has been ever solved that
contain the RNA-binding domain and a regulation module. We report the NMR
assignment of a constitutively active fragment of LicT, named D99A-CAT-PRD1 or
CAT-PRD1*. This fragment is composed of the RNA-binding module and the first
N-terminal regulation module which bears the mutation of Asp99 to an asparagine. 
It is dimeric as the native protein, with a 40 kD molecular weight. The D99N
mutation is sufficient to endow this fragment with a high RNA-binding
constitutive activity, in a phosphorylation-free context. The assignment reported
here should set the base of future NMR investigation of signal transduction
between the regulatory module and the effector module in the active state of the 
protein, and in the long term enable the structural study of the full length
protein structure in interaction with its target RNA.

DOI: 10.1007/s12104-019-09914-w 
PMID: 31612430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

