
1. PLoS One. 2019 Oct 15;14(10):e0223861. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0223861.
eCollection 2019.

Differential immunomodulation of T-cells by immunoglobulin replacement therapy in
primary and secondary antibody deficiency.

Dinh T(1)(2), Oh J(1)(2), Cameron DW(2)(3), Lee SH(1), Cowan J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Clinical Epidemiology Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

Patients with primary or secondary antibody deficiency (PAD or SAD) are at
increased risk of recurrent infections that can be alleviated by immunoglobulin
replacement therapy (IRT). In addition to replenishing antibody levels, IRT has
been suggested to modulate immune response in patients with antibody deficiency. 
Although both commonly treated with IRT, the underlying causes of PAD and SAD
vary greatly, suggesting differential modulation of T-cell function that may lead
to different responses to IRT. To explore this, peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) were sampled from 17 PAD and 14 SAD patients before and 2-10 months
after initiation of IRT, and analyzed for changes in T-cell phenotype and
function. Proportions of CD4, CD8, Treg, or memory T-cells did not significantly 
change post-IRT compared to pre-IRT. However, we report distinct modulation in
T-cell function between PAD and SAD patients post-IRT. Upon α-CD3/CD28
stimulation, proportion of IFN-γ+ CD4 and CD8 T-cells increased in SAD (p =
0.005) but not PAD patients post-IRT compared to baseline. Interestingly, total
T-cell proliferation was reduced post-IRT in both PAD and SAD patients, although 
the reduction in proliferation was primarily due to reduced CD4 T-cell
proliferation in PAD (p = 0.025) in contrast to CD8 T-cells in SAD (p = 0.042).
In summary, even though IRT provides patients with passive humoral
immunity-mediated protection in PAD and SAD, our findings suggest that IRT
immunomodulation of T-cells is different in T-cell subsets depending on
underlying immunodeficiency.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0223861 
PMCID: PMC6793872
PMID: 31613907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Please note that Juthaporn Cowan received
research funds and honoraria from CSL Behring, Grifols, Shire and Octapharma,
outside the submitted work. This does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS
ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

