
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Sep 20;10:2248. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02248. eCollection
2019.

The Non-synonymous rs763780 Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism in IL17F Gene Is
Associated With Susceptibility to Tuberculosis and Advanced Disease Severity in
Argentina.

Rolandelli A(1)(2), Pellegrini JM(1)(2), Hernández Del Pino RE(3), Tateosian
NL(1)(2), Amiano NO(1)(2), Morelli MP(1)(2), Castello FA(1)(2), Casco N(4), Levi 
A(4), Palmero DJ(4), García VE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Buenos Aires (UBA), School
of Sciences, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Institute of Biological Chemistry of Exact and Natural Sciences (IQUIBICEN),
National Council of Science and Technology (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Center of Investigation and Transference of National Northwest University of
Buenos Aires (CITNOBA), The National Northwest University of Buenos Aires
(UNNOBA)-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Tisioneumonology Division, F. J. Muñiz Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Th17 lymphocytes, that produce IL17A, IL17F, and IL22, play a crucial role during
the immune response against Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection. Whereas, 
the contribution of IL17A in immunity to tuberculosis is usually accepted, the
role of IL17F has been scarcely studied so far. The aim of this work was to
evaluate the existence of a potential association of the non-synonymous variant
rs763780 SNP of the IL17F gene with human tuberculosis. Accordingly, by comparing
healthy donors (HD) and tuberculosis patients (TB) populations we demonstrated an
association between the C allele of the SNP and the susceptibility to
tuberculosis disease in Argentina. Furthermore, we found that peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from individuals with a more effective immune response 
against Mtb secreted the highest levels of IL17F when stimulated with a lysate of
Mtb (Mtb-Ag). Besides, we evidenced that Mtb-Ag-stimulated PBMCs from HD carrying
the C variant of the SNP displayed the lowest IFNG secretion, proliferation
index, and SLAM expression as compared to TT carriers. Moreover,
Mtb-Ag-stimulated PBMCs from TB carrying the C allele produced the lowest levels 
of IFNG, the highest level of IL17A, and the minimum proliferation indexes as
compared to TT TB, suggesting a relationship between the C allele and
tuberculosis severity. In fact, TB carrying the C allele presented a more severe 
disease, with the highest bacilli burden in sputum. Together, our findings
identify the IL17F rs763780 SNP as a biomarker of tuberculosis susceptibility and
advanced disease severity in Argentina, suggesting that IL17F could be a critical
cytokine in tuberculosis immunity.

Copyright © 2019 Rolandelli, Pellegrini, Hernández Del Pino, Tateosian, Amiano,
Morelli, Castello, Casco, Levi, Palmero and García.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02248 
PMCID: PMC6764169
PMID: 31616423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

