
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Sep 18;10:2183. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02183. eCollection
2019.

C-Reactive Protein Promotes the Expansion of Myeloid Derived Cells With
Suppressor Functions.

Jimenez RV(1), Kuznetsova V(2)(3), Connelly AN(2)(3), Hel Z(2)(3), Szalai AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
United States.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL, United States.

Previously we established that human C-reactive protein (CRP) exacerbates mouse
acute kidney injury and that the effect was associated with heightened renal
accumulation of myeloid derived cells with suppressor functions (MDSC). Herein we
provide direct evidence that CRP modulates the development and suppressive
actions of MDSCs in vitro. We demonstrate that CRP dose-dependently increases the
generation of MDSC from wild type mouse bone marrow progenitors and enhances MDSC
production of intracellular reactive oxygen species (iROS). When added to
co-cultures, CRP significantly enhanced the ability of MDSCs to suppress
CD3/CD28-stimulated T cell proliferation. Experiments using MDSCs from FcγRIIB
deficient mice (FcγRIIB-/-) showed that CRP's ability to expand MDSCs and trigger
their increased production of iROS was FcγRIIB-independent, whereas its ability
to enhance the MDSC T cell suppressive action was FcγRIIB-dependent. Importantly,
CRP also enabled freshly isolated primary human neutrophils to suppress
proliferation of autologous T cells. These findings suggest that CRP might be an 
endogenous regulator of MDSC numbers and actions in vivo.

Copyright © 2019 Jimenez, Kuznetsova, Connelly, Hel and Szalai.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02183 
PMCID: PMC6759522
PMID: 31620123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

