
1. Cytokine. 2020 Feb;126:154866. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2019.154866. Epub 2019 Oct 16.

Co-expression of Interleukin-17A molecular adjuvant and prophylactic Helicobacter
pylori genetic vaccine could cause sterile immunity in Treg suppressed mice.

Nemattalab M(1), Shenagari M(2), Taheri M(3), Mahjoob M(1), Nazari Chamaki F(4), 
Mojtahedi A(5), Hasan-Alizadeh E(4), Ashrafkhani B(4), Mousavi Niri N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Guilan University of Medical 
Sciences, Rasht, Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Guilan University of Medical 
Sciences, Rasht, Iran; Cellular and Molecular Research Center, School of
Medicine, Guilan University of Medical Sciences, Rasht, Iran. Electronic address:
Shenagari@gums.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Guilan University of Medical Sciences, Rasht, Iran.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Guilan University of Medical 
Sciences, Rasht, Iran; Cellular and Molecular Research Center, School of
Medicine, Guilan University of Medical Sciences, Rasht, Iran.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Advanced Medical Sciences, Tehran
Medical Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.

The increasing clinical significance of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) in human 
stomach cancer has led to global efforts to eradicate this pathogen. Recent
studies have confirmed the importance of some cytokines such as Interleukin-18
(IL-18), Interleukin-8 (IL-8), Interleukin-17A (IL-17A) and Interleukin-22
(IL-22) in the pathogenesis of the so-called bacterium. This study was designed
to compare the effects of Type 1T helper (Th1), Type 2T helper (Th2) cells,
Regulatory T cells (Treg) and T helper 17 (Th17) modulatory effects on the
efficacy of designed H. pylori vaccine by incorporating some molecular adjuvants 
in Treg competent and Treg suppressed groups. A bicistronic vector was used for
simultaneous expression of codon-optimized Outer inflammatory protein a (OipA)
gene and modified mice IL-18, IL-17A, IL-22 and Foxp3 (forkhead box P3) cytokines
from four cassettes. Immunization of mice groups was performed using produced
plasmids intradermally. Specific IgG1 and IgG2 and IgA antibody titers produced
in mice were confirmed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in sera and
intestine obtained four weeks after the last immunization. After being stimulated
with a mixture of both anti-CD28 mAb and H. pylori lysate, frequencies of single 
Interferon-Gamma (IFN-γ), single IL-17 and dual IFN-γ/IL-17-secreting T-cells
were documented using dual-color FluoroSpot. The kinetics of Th1, Th2 and Th17 in
the immunized animals was determined by relative quantification of IL-17A, IL-22,
IFN-γ, IL-8, IL-2 and IL-4 specific mRNAs. Four weeks after bacterial challenge, 
quantitative colony count in the isolated and homogenized stomachs was utilized
to assess the level of protective immunity among all groups. The results of
immunologic assays showed that the highest cell-mediated immunity cytokines were 
produced in IL-17 receiving group in which the Treg responses were suppressed
previously by the administration of the Foxp3 as an immunogen. In addition,
potent clearance of Helicobacter pylori infection was seen in this group as well.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2019.154866 
PMID: 31629103 

