
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1172:63-78. doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-9367-9_3.

Structures of Immune Checkpoints: An Overview on the CD28-B7 Family.

Liu W(1)(2), Zang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris
Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA.
(2)Pfizer Inc., 230 East Grand Avenue, South San Francisco, CA, 94080, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA.
xingxing.zang@einstein.yu.edu.

The co-stimulation and co-inhibition signal pathways, immune checkpoints, are
among the central mechanisms to regulate the T-cell immunity. Optimal signals
involve intricate interactions of numerous ligands and receptors. Manipulation of
these signals offers great clinical opportunities and has revolutionized the
cancer treatment therapies. The 2018 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was
awarded to James P. Allison and Tasuku Honjo in recognition of their discovery of
cancer immunotherapy by inhibition of immune checkpoint molecules. Despite the
landmark discovery in cancer immunotherapy, the efforts to harness immunity
against cancer are also restricted by the limited knowledge on the co-stimulation
and co-inhibition signaling networks. Understanding the structures of these
molecules, in particular, tackling the interaction paradigms from the structural 
perspective, help to provide more accurate insights into the signaling
mechanisms, which may further facilitate the development of novel biologics and
improve the efficacy of the existing biologics against these targets. Here we
review our current understanding on the structures of these co-stimulatory and
co-inhibitory molecules. Specifically, we focus on the structural basis of
several checkpoint molecules among the CD28-B7 family and discuss the therapeutic
drugs against these targets for the treatment of human cancers, autoimmune
disorders, and transplantation.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-13-9367-9_3 
PMID: 31628651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

