
1. Transplantation. 1988 Mar;45(3):632-9.

Fine specificity and idiotype diversity of the murine anti-HLA-A2, A28 monoclonal
antibodies CR11-351 and KS1.

Tsujisaki M(1), Sakaguchi K, Igarashi M, Richiardi P, Perosa F, Ferrone S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla 
10595.

The monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) CR11-351 and KS1 are secreted by hybridomas
generated with splenocytes from BALB/c mice immunized with the cultured human B
lymphoid cells LG-2 (HLA-A2,A2,B27,B27). The 2 monoclonal antibodies
immunoprecipitated components with a superimposable 2-dimensional gel
electrophoretic profile from the cultured B lymphoid cells LG-2 and inhibited the
cytotoxicity of the anti-HLA-A2,A28 T cell clone MI#3 to a similar extent. In
crossinhibition experiments, the MoAb CR11-351 and KS1 completely inhibited the
binding of each other to lymphoid cells with the appropriate HLA phenotype.
Testing with a panel of HLA-typed lymphoid cells showed that the MoAb CR11-351
and KS1 display the same serologic specificity, since both of them react with
HLA-A2 and/or A28 antigens bearing cells. The 2 monoclonal antibodies recognize
distinct, although spatially close, determinants, since only the MoAb CR11-351
displays differential reactivity with HLA-A2 variant cell lines and reacts with
HLA-A9 bearing B lymphoid cells. Analysis of MoAb CR11-351 and KS1 with syngeneic
polyclonal and monoclonal antiidiotypic antibodies detected no sharing of
idiotopes between the 2 monoclonal antibodies. In view of their reactivity with
distinct determinants, these results are in agreement with the concept that the
antigenic specificity of an antibody controls at least in part the expression of 
its idiotypes.

DOI: 10.1097/00007890-198803000-00026 
PMID: 3162340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

