
1. Curr Obes Rep. 2019 Dec;8(4):413-433. doi: 10.1007/s13679-019-00364-y.

The Role of Adipokines in Breast Cancer: Current Evidence and Perspectives.

Christodoulatos GS(1)(2), Spyrou N(3), Kadillari J(1), Psallida S(2), Dalamaga
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, 75 Mikras Asias, Goudi, 11527, Athens, Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Microbiology, KAT Hospital, 2 Nikis, Kifisia, 14561, Athens,
Greece.
(3)251 Airforce General Hospital, 3 Kanellopoulou, 11525, Athens, Greece.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, 75 Mikras Asias, Goudi, 11527, Athens, Greece.
madalamaga@med.uoa.gr.

PURPOSE: The current review shows evidence for the role of adipokines in breast
cancer (BC) pathogenesis summarizing the mechanisms underlying the association
between adipokines and breast malignancy. Special emphasis is given also on
intriguing insights into the relationship between obesity and BC as well as on
the role of novel adipokines in BC development.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent evidence has underscored the role of the triad of
obesity, insulin resistance, and adipokines in postmenopausal BC. Adipokines
exert independent and joint effects on activation of major intracellular signal
networks implicated in BC cell proliferation, growth, survival, invasion, and
metastasis, particularly in the context of obesity, considered a systemic
endocrine dysfunction characterized by chronic inflammation. To date, more than
10 adipokines have been linked to BC, and this catalog is continuously
increasing. The majority of circulating adipokines, such as leptin, resistin,
visfatin, apelin, lipocalin 2, osteopontin, and oncostatin M, is elevated in BC, 
while some adipokines such as adiponectin and irisin (adipo-myokine) are
generally decreased in BC and considered protective against breast
carcinogenesis. Further evidence from basic and translational research is
necessary to delineate the ontological role of adipokines and their interplay in 
BC pathogenesis. More large-scale clinical and longitudinal studies are awaited
to assess their clinical utility in BC prognosis and follow-up. Finally, novel
more effective and safer adipokine-centered therapeutic strategies could pave the
way for targeted oncotherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s13679-019-00364-y 
PMID: 31637624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

