
1. FASEB J. 2019 Dec;33(12):14159-14170. doi: 10.1096/fj.201900993RR. Epub 2019 Oct 
25.

Epigenetic regulation of TIMP1 expression by 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase-1
binding to DNA:RNA hybrid.

Pan L(1), Wang H(1), Luo J(1), Zeng J(1), Pi J(1), Liu H(1), Liu C(1), Ba X(2),
Qu X(1), Xiang Y(1), Boldogh I(3), Qin X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medicine, Xiangya Medical School,
Central South University, Changsha, China.
(2)The Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics, Ministry of Education, Institute 
of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, The University 
of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA.

8-Oxoguanine DNA glycosylase-1 (OGG1)-initiated base excision repair pathway is
primarily responsible for 7, 8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) removal from DNA.
Recent studies, however, have shown that 8-oxoG in gene regulatory elements may
serve as an epigenetic mark, and OGG1 has distinct functions in modulating gene
expression. Genome-wide mapping of oxidative stress-induced OGG1 enrichment
within introns was documented, but its significance has not yet been fully
characterized. Here, we explored whether OGG1 recruited to intron 1 of tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP1) gene and modulated its expression. Using
chromatin and DNA:RNA hybrid immunoprecipitation assays, we report recruitment of
OGG1 to the DNA:RNA hybrid in intron 1, where it increases nascent RNA but lowers
mRNA levels in O3-exposed human airway epithelial cells and mouse lungs. Decrease
in TIMP1 expression is alleviated by antioxidant administration, small
interfering RNA depletion, or inhibition of OGG1 binding to its genomic
substrate. In vitro studies revealed direct interaction between OGG1 and 8-oxoG
containing DNA:RNA hybrid, without excision of its substrate. Inhibition of OGG1 
binding to DNA:RNA hybrid translated into an increase in TIMP1 expression and a
decrease in oxidant-induced lung inflammatory responses as well as airway
remodeling. Data documented here reveal a novel molecular link between OGG1 at
damaged sites and transcription dynamics that may contribute to oxidative
stress-induced cellular and tissue responses.-Pan, L., Wang, H., Luo, J., Zeng,
J., Pi, J., Liu, H., Liu, C., Ba, X., Qu, X., Xiang, Y., Boldogh, I., Qin, X.
Epigenetic regulation of TIMP1 expression by 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase-1
binding to DNA:RNA hybrid.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201900993RR 
PMCID: PMC6894084
PMID: 31652414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

