
1. Vet Med Sci. 2020 Feb;6(1):69-75. doi: 10.1002/vms3.207. Epub 2019 Oct 28.

Prevalence and characterization of virulence genes in Escherichia coli isolated
from piglets suffering post-weaning diarrhoea in Shandong Province, China.

Li S(1), Wang L(2), Zhou Y(3), Miao Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Shandong First Medical University, Tai'an City,
China.
(2)The Second Women & Children's Healthcare Center of Jinan City, Laiwu City,
China.
(3)Center for Disease Control, Veterinary Bureau of Daiyue Region, Tai'an City,
China.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Shandong First Medical University, Tai'an City,
China.

The present study was performed to investigate the prevalence and characteristics
of virulence genes in Escherichia coli (E. coli) isolated from piglets suffering 
post-weaning diarrhoea (PWD) in Shandong Province, China. The standard
bacteriological method was used to isolate and identify E. coli, and then
multiplex polymerase chain reaction (mPCR) was performed to determine virulence
genes in E. coli. Among the 300 isolates, 166 (55.3％) harboured at least one
virulence gene. Among the 166 isolates, 155 (93.4％) contained toxin-related
genes. For enterotoxin genes, EAST1 (58/166, 34.9％) and LT-I (45/166, 27.1％) were
the most common, followed by STa (32/166, 19.3％) and STb (21/166, 12.7％); for
pathogenicity island (PAI) genes, irp2 (49/166, 29.5％) was the most dominant,
followed by eae (48/166, 28.9％); for Shiga toxigenic E. coli (STEC)-associated
toxin genes, Stx2e and hlyA genes were observed in 19 (19/166, 11.4％) and three
strains (3/166, 1.8％) respectively. In addition, of the 166 isolates, 95 (95/166,
57.2％) contained adhesin genes, and AIDA-I (33/166, 19.9％) was the most common,
followed by paa (27/166, 16.3％), F5 (K99) (20/166, 12.0％), F18 (15/166, 9.0％) and
F41 (12/166, 7.2％). In summary, these findings demonstrated the prevalence and
characteristics of virulence factors in E. coli isolates from piglets with PWD in
Shandong Province of China, and the data may be useful for establishing
preventive measures for post-weaning piglet diarrhoea.

© 2019 The Authors. Veterinary Medicine and Science Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/vms3.207 
PMCID: PMC7036318
PMID: 31657876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

