
1. Extremophiles. 2020 Jan;24(1):121-133. doi: 10.1007/s00792-019-01140-5. Epub 2019
Oct 25.

Branched-chain amino acid catabolism of Thermoanaerobacter pseudoethanolicus
reveals potential route to branched-chain alcohol formation.

Scully SM(1), Orlygsson J(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Akureyri, Faculty of Natural Resource Sciences, Borgir,
Nordurslod 2, 600, Akureyri, Iceland.
(2)University of Akureyri, Faculty of Natural Resource Sciences, Borgir,
Nordurslod 2, 600, Akureyri, Iceland. jorlygs@unak.is.

The fermentation of branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) to branched-chain fatty
acids (BCFAs) and branched-chain alcohols (BCOHs) is described using
Thermoanaerobacter pseudoethanolicus. BCAAs were not degraded without an electron
scavenging system but were degraded to a mixture of their BCFA (major) and BCOH
(minor) when thiosulfate was added to the culture. Various environmental
parameters were investigated using isoleucine as the substrate which ultimately
demonstrated that at higher liquid-gas phase ratios the formation of
2-methyl-1-butanol from isoleucine achieved a maximal titer of 3.4Â mM at a 1:1
liquid-gas ratio suggesting that higher partial pressure of hydrogen influences
the BCOH/BCFA ratio but did not increase further with higher L-G phase ratios.
Alternately, increasing the thiosulfate concentration decreased the BCOH to BCFA 
ratio. Kinetic monitoring of BCAA degradation revealed that the formation of
BCOHs occurs slowly after the onset of BCFA formation. 13C2-labeled studies of
leucine confirmed the production of a mixture of 3-methyl-1-butyrate and
3-methyl-1-butanol, while experiments involving 13C1-labeled 3-methyl-1-butyrate 
in fermentations containing leucine demonstrated that the carboxylic acid is
reduced to the corresponding alcohol. Thus, the role of carboxylic acid reduction
is likely of importance in the production of BCOH formation during the
degradation of BCAA such as leucine.

DOI: 10.1007/s00792-019-01140-5 
PMID: 31654148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

