
1. Nat Commun. 2019 Oct 30;10(1):4929. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-12942-8.

Structure of a cyanobacterial photosystem I tetramer revealed by cryo-electron
microscopy.

Kato K(1), Nagao R(1), Jiang TY(1), Ueno Y(2), Yokono M(3), Chan SK(1), Watanabe 
M(4), Ikeuchi M(4), Shen JR(5), Akimoto S(6), Miyazaki N(7)(8), Akita F(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Graduate School of
Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Hyogo, 657-8501, Japan.
(3)Nippon Flour Mills Co., Ltd., Innovation Center, Kanagawa, 243-0041, Japan.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan.
(5)Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Graduate School of
Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan.
shen@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp.
(6)Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Hyogo, 657-8501, Japan.
akimoto@hawk.kobe-u.ac.jp.
(7)Life Science Center for Survival Dynamics, Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance 
(TARA), University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. naomiyazaki@tara.tsukuba.ac.jp.
(8)Institute for Protein Research, Laboratory of Protein Synthesis and
Expression, Osaka University, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
naomiyazaki@tara.tsukuba.ac.jp.
(9)Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Graduate School of
Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan.
fusamichi_a@okayama-u.ac.jp.
(10)Japan Science and Technology Agency, PRESTO, Saitama, 332-0012, Japan.
fusamichi_a@okayama-u.ac.jp.

Photosystem I (PSI) functions to harvest light energy for conversion into
chemical energy. The organisation of PSI is variable depending on the species of 
organism. Here we report the structure of a tetrameric PSI core isolated from a
cyanobacterium, Anabaena sp. PCC 7120, analysed by single-particle cryo-electron 
microscopy (cryo-EM) at 3.3 Å resolution. The PSI tetramer has a C2 symmetry and 
is organised in a dimer of dimers form. The structure reveals interactions at the
dimer-dimer interface and the existence of characteristic pigment orientations
and inter-pigment distances within the dimer units that are important for unique 
excitation energy transfer. In particular, characteristic residues of PsaL are
identified to be responsible for the formation of the tetramer. Time-resolved
fluorescence analyses showed that the PSI tetramer has an enhanced
excitation-energy quenching. These structural and spectroscopic findings provide 
insights into the physiological significance of the PSI tetramer and evolutionary
changes of the PSI organisations.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-12942-8 
PMCID: PMC6821847
PMID: 31666526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

