
1. PLoS One. 2019 Oct 29;14(10):e0224392. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224392.
eCollection 2019.

Factors associated with pneumococcal carriage and density in infants and young
children in Laos PDR.

Dunne EM(1)(2), Choummanivong M(3), Neal EFG(1)(2), Stanhope K(1), Nguyen
CD(1)(2), Xeuatvongsa A(4), Satzke C(1)(2)(5), Sychareun V(3), Russell FM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Immunity, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.
(3)University of Health Sciences, Vientiane, Lao People's Democratic Republic.
(4)Ministry of Health, Vientiane, Lao People's Democratic Republic.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.

Nasopharyngeal carriage of Streptococcus pneumoniae (the pneumococcus) is a
precursor to pneumococcal disease. Several host and environmental factors have
been associated with pneumococcal carriage, however few studies have examined the
relationship between host factors and pneumococcal carriage density. We sought to
identify risk factors for pneumococcal carriage and density using data from
cross-sectional pneumococcal carriage surveys conducted in the Lao People's
Democratic Republic before and after the introduction of the 13-valent
pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13). Nasopharyngeal swabs were collected
infants from aged 5-8 weeks old (n = 999) and children aged 12-23 months (n =
1,010), pneumococci detected by quantitative PCR, and a risk factor questionnaire
completed. Logistic and linear regression models were used to evaluate
associations between participant characteristics and pneumococcal carriage and
density. In infants aged 5-8 weeks, living in a household with two or more
children under the age of five years (aOR 1.97; 95% CI 1.39-2.79) and low family 
income (aOR 1.64; 95% CI 0.99-2.72) were positively associated with pneumococcal 
carriage. For children aged 12-23 months, upper respiratory tract infection
(URTI) symptoms (aOR 2.64; 95% CI 1.97-3.53), two or more children under five in 
the household (aOR 2.40; 95% CI 1.80-3.20), and rural residence (aOR 1.84, 95% CI
1.35-2.50) were positively associated with pneumococcal carriage. PCV13
vaccination was negatively associated with carriage of PCV13 serotypes (aOR 0.60;
95% CI 0.44-0.83). URTI symptoms (p < 0.001), current breastfeeding (p = 0.005), 
rural residence (p = 0.012), and delivery by Caesarean section (p = 0.035) were
associated with higher mean pneumococcal density in pneumococcal carriers (both
age groups combined). This study provides new data on pneumococcal carriage and
density in a high disease burden setting in southeast Asia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224392 
PMCID: PMC6818791
PMID: 31661527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: EMD and CS have
received research funding from Pfizer for an unrelated project. This does not
alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

