
1. NPJ Vaccines. 2019 Oct 25;4:45. doi: 10.1038/s41541-019-0139-z. eCollection 2019.

An oral alpha-galactosylceramide adjuvanted Helicobacter pylori vaccine induces
protective IL-1R- and IL-17R-dependent Th1 responses.

Longet S(#)(1), Abautret-Daly A(#)(1), Davitt CJH(1), McEntee CP(1), Aversa V(2),
Rosa M(2), Coulter IS(2), Holmgren J(3), Raghavan S(#)(3), Lavelle EC(#)(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)1Adjuvant Research Group, School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity
Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, D02 R590
Ireland.
(2)2Sublimity Therapeutics Limited, Dublin City University, Alpha Innovation
Campus, Old Finglas Road, Dublin, D11 KXN4 Ireland.
(3)3University of Gothenburg Vaccine Research Institute, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, 
Box 435, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)4Centre for Research on Adaptive Nanostructures and Nanodevices & Advanced
Materials Bio-Engineering Research Centre, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, D02 
PN40 Ireland.
(#)Contributed equally

Helicobacter pylori causes chronic gastric infection that can lead to peptic
ulcers and is an identified risk factor for gastric cancer development. Although 
much effort has been put into the development of a Helicobacter pylori vaccine
over the last three decades, none has yet reached clinical application. Specific 
challenges pertaining to effective H. pylori vaccine development include the lack
of proven vaccine-effective antigens and safe mucosal adjuvants to enhance local 
immune responses as well as the lack of accepted correlates of protection.
Herein, we demonstrate that prophylactic intragastric immunisation with a
whole-cell killed H. pylori antigen administered together with the non-toxic oral
adjuvant α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) induced effective immune protection
against H. pylori infection in mice, which was of similar magnitude as when using
the "gold standard" cholera toxin as adjuvant. We further describe that this
α-GalCer-adjuvanted vaccine formulation elicited strong intestinal and systemic
Th1 responses as well as significant antigen-specific mucosal and systemic
antibody responses. Finally, we report that the protective intestinal Th1
responses induced by α-GalCer are dependent on CD1d, IL-1R as well as IL-17R
signalling. In summary, our results show that α-GalCer is a promising adjuvant
for inclusion in an oral vaccine against H. pylori infection.

© The Author(s) 2019.

DOI: 10.1038/s41541-019-0139-z 
PMCID: PMC6814776
PMID: 31666991 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing interests.

