
1. Environ Pollut. 2020 Jan;256:113408. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2019.113408. Epub 2019
Oct 19.

Transformation of m-aminophenol by birnessite (δ-MnO2) mediated oxidative
processes: Reaction kinetics, pathways and toxicity assessment.

Huang W(1), Wu G(1), Xiao H(1), Song H(2), Gan S(1), Ruan S(1), Gao Z(1), Song
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Environment, South China Normal University,
Universities Town, Guangzhou, 510006, PR China.
(2)School of Chemistry and Environment, South China Normal University,
Universities Town, Guangzhou, 510006, PR China; Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Environmental Protection and Resources Utilization, Guangzhou
Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academic of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510640, PR
China; Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage,
South China Normal University, Guangzhou, 510006, PR China. Electronic address:
songhaiyan@m.scnu.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Guangzhou Institute of
Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510640, PR China.

The m-aminophenol (m-AP) is a widely used industrial chemical, which enters
water, soils, and sediments with waste emissions. A common soil metal oxide,
birnessite (δ-MnO2), was found to mediate the transformation of m-AP with fast
rates under acidic conditions. Because of the highly complexity of the m-AP
transformation, mechanism-based models were taken to fit the transformation
kinetic process of m-AP. The results indicated that the transformation of m-AP
with δ-MnO2 could be described by precursor complex formation rate-limiting
model. The oxidative transformation of m-AP on the surface of δ-MnO2 was highly
dependent on reactant concentrations, pH, temperature, and other co-solutes. The 
UV-VIS absorbance and mass spectra analysis indicated that the pathway leading to
m-AP transformation may be the polymerization through the coupling reaction. The 
m-AP radicals were likely to be coupled by the covalent bonding between
unsubstituted C2, C4 or C6 atoms in the m-AP aromatic rings to form oligomers as 
revealed by the results of activation energy and mass spectra. Furthermore, the
toxicity assessment of the transformation productions indicated that the toxicity
of m-AP to the E. coli K-12 could be reduced by MnO2 mediated transformation. The
results are helpful for understanding the environmental behavior and potential
risk of m-AP in natural environment.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2019.113408 
PMID: 31662267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

