
1. J Neurosci. 2019 Dec 4;39(49):9689-9701. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1142-19.2019.
Epub 2019 Nov 1.

Disrupted Blood-Retina Lysophosphatidylcholine Transport Impairs Photoreceptor
Health But Not Visual Signal Transduction.

Lobanova ES(1)(2), Schuhmann K(3), Finkelstein S(4), Lewis TR(4), Cady MA(4), Hao
Y(4), Keuthan C(4)(5), Ash JD(4)(5), Burns ME(6), Shevchenko A(3), Arshavsky
VY(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology, elobanova@ufl.edu vadim.arshavsky@duke.edu.
(2)Pharmacology and Therapeutics.
(3)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany,
01307.
(4)Departments of Ophthalmology.
(5)Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, 32610.
(6)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California-Davis, 
Davis, California, 95618.
(7)Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina,
27710, and.

Retinal photoreceptor cells contain the highest concentration of docosahexaenoic 
acid (DHA) in our bodies, and it has been long assumed that this is critical for 
supporting normal vision. Indeed, early studies using DHA dietary restriction
documented reduced light sensitivity by DHA-deprived retinas. Recently, it has
been demonstrated that a major route of DHA entry in the retina is the delivery
across the blood-retina barrier by the sodium-dependent lipid transporter,
Mfsd2a. This discovery opened a unique opportunity to analyze photoreceptor
health and function in DHA-deprived retinas using the Mfsd2a knock-out mouse as
animal model. Our lipidome analyses of Mfsd2a -/- retinas and outer segment
membranes corroborated the previously reported decrease in the fraction of
DHA-containing phospholipids and a compensatory increase in phospholipids
containing arachidonic acid. We also revealed an increase in the retinal content 
of monounsaturated fatty acids and a reduction in very long chain fatty acids.
These changes could be explained by a combination of reduced DHA supply to the
retina and a concomitant upregulation of several fatty acid desaturases
controlled by sterol regulatory element-binding transcription factors, which are 
upregulated in Mfsd2a -/- retinas. Mfsd2a -/- retinas undergo slow progressive
degeneration, with ∼30% of photoreceptor cells lost by the age of 6 months.
Despite this pathology, the ultrastructure Mfsd2a -/- photoreceptors and their
ability to produce light responses were essentially normal. These data
demonstrate that, whereas maintaining the lysophosphatidylcholine route of DHA
supply to the retina is essential for long-term photoreceptor survival, it is not
important for supporting normal phototransduction.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
Phospholipids containing docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) are greatly enriched in the
nervous system, with the highest concentration found in the light-sensitive
membranes of photoreceptor cells. In this study, we analyzed the consequences of 
impaired DHA transport across the blood-retina barrier. We have found that, in
addition to a predictable reduction in the DHA level, the affected retinas
undergo a complex, transcriptionally-driven rebuilding of their membrane lipidome
in a pattern preserving the overall saturation/desaturation balance of retinal
phospholipids. Remarkably, these changes do not affect the ability of
photoreceptors to produce responses to light but are detrimental for the
long-term survival of these cells.

Copyright © 2019 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1142-19.2019 
PMCID: PMC6891062
PMID: 31676603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

