
1. J Nutr Biochem. 2019 Dec;74:108246. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2019.108246. Epub 2019
Oct 15.

Inter-correlated gut microbiota and SCFAs changes upon antibiotics exposure links
with rapid body-mass gain in weaned piglet model.

Che L(1), Hu Q(2), Wang R(3), Zhang D(2), Liu C(2), Zhang Y(2), Xin G(4), Fang
Z(3), Lin Y(3), Xu S(3), Feng B(3), Chen D(3), Wu(3), Gao F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Nutrition Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Ya'an, China.
Electronic address: clianqiang@hotmail.com.
(2)Genome Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural
Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Shenzhen, China.
(3)Animal Nutrition Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Ya'an, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, Department of Chinese Medicines
Analysis, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.
(5)Genome Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural
Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Shenzhen, China; Comparative Pediatrics and Nutrition, Department of Veterinary
and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Frederiksberg, DK, Denmark. Electronic address: flys828@gmail.com.

The risk of overweight or obesity in association with early exposure of
antibiotics remains an important public issue for health-care of children.
Low-dose antibiotics (LDA) have been widely used to enhance growth rate of pigs, 
providing a good animal model to study the underlying mechanism. In present
study, 28 female piglets, weaned at 21 d, were randomly classified into two
groups, receiving either a control diet or a diet supplemented with LDA for 4
weeks. The total bacterial load and intestinal microbiota were determined by qPCR
and 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. UPLC-QTRAP-MS/MS and RNA-seq were further used 
to determine the colonic SCFAs and transcriptomes. Results showed that LDA
significantly increased growth rate and food intake. The F/B index,
Methanosphaera species, and the pathway of "carbohydrate metabolism" were
improved by LDA exposure, indicating the better carbohydrate degradation and
energy utilization. Furthermore, correlation analysis indicated the microbial
community contributing to SCFAs production was enriched upon LDA exposure,
associating with increased concentrations of short-chain and branched-chain fatty
acids (caproate, 2-methyl butyrate and 4-methyl valerate). A multivariate linear 
fitting model analysis highlighted that caproate was positively correlated with
two genera (Faecalibacterium and Allisonella) and four differentially expressed
genes (ZNF134, TBX5, NEU4 and SEMA6D), which were all significantly increased
upon LDA exposure. Collectively, our study indicates that the growth-promoting
effect of LDA exposure in early life is associated with the shifts of colonic
microbiota to increase utilization of carbohydrates and energy, enhanced SCFAs
production and colonic functions.

Copyright Â© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2019.108246 
PMID: 31671360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

