
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2020 Jan;60(1):47-57. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201900373. Epub 2019
Nov 4.

Study of As-resistant bacteria from Nadia, India and a survey of two As
resistance-related proteins.

Rahman Z(1)(2), Thomas L(2)(3), Singh VP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, Zakir Husain Delhi College, University of Delhi, Delhi, 
India.
(2)Department of Botany, University of Delhi, Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Botany, Hansraj College, University of Delhi, Delhi, India.

The present investigation deals with the characterisation of three As-resistant
bacteria, Bacillus aryabhattai strain VPS1, Bacillus licheniformis strain VPS6
and Sporosarcina thermotolerans strain VPS7 isolated from the rhizosphere of a
contaminated paddy field in Chakdaha, Nadia, West Bengal, India. Two strains,
VPS6 and VPS7 showed ureolytic activity, which can be used for microbial-induced 
calcite precipitation of As as a bioremediation option. However, As reduction and
oxidation capacities were not reported in any of these bacteria. A phylogenetic
tree of 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequences was constructed for all three bacterial 
isolates, including different species of As-resistant Bacillus and Sporosarcina. 
Furthermore, literature survey and genome mining were employed to explore the
diversity of As resistance-related proteins, arsenite S-adenosylmethyltransferase
(ArsM) and arsenical pump membrane protein (ArsB) among different bacteria, and
the phylogenetic relatedness was studied to understand the distribution and
evolution of their amino acid sequences. ArsB was predominantly present in a wide
variety of bacteria (347 taxa); however, ArsM was reported in comparatively fewer
isolates (109 taxa). There were a total of 60 similar taxa that contained both
ArsM and ArsB. Both proteins were most abundantly present in phylum
Proteobacteria. Overall, this investigation enumerates As-resistant bacteria to
understand the As metabolism in the environment, and the phylogenetic analysis of
As resistance-related proteins helps in understanding the functional relationship
in different bacteria for their role in As mobility in the environment.

Â© 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201900373 
PMID: 31680284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

