
1. Front Pharmacol. 2019 Oct 15;10:1206. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.01206. eCollection 
2019.

Growth Inhibitory Activity of Callicarpa americana Leaf Extracts Against
Cutibacterium acnes.

Pineau RM(1), Hanson SE(2), Lyles JT(2), Quave CL(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA,
United States.
(2)Center for the Study of Human Health, Emory College of Arts and Sciences,
Atlanta, GA, United States.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
United States.
(4)Emory University Herbarium, Atlanta, GA, United States.

Acne vulgaris is a common skin disease affecting adolescents and young adults of 
all ethnic groups, negatively impacting self-esteem, self-confidence, and social 
life. The Gram-positive bacteria Cutibacterium acnes colonizes the sebum-rich
follicle and contributes to inflammation of the pilosebaceous gland. Long-term
antibiotic therapies targeting C. acnes lead to the development of antimicrobial 
resistance, and novel acne vulgaris therapies are needed. This study investigated
the C. acnes inhibitory activity of Callicarpa americana leaves, a native
Southeastern United States shrub historically used by Native Americans to treat
fever, stomachache, and pruritis. Flash chromatography fractions of the ethyl
acetate-soluble C. americana ethanol leaf extract (649C-F9 and 649C-F13)
exhibited MICs ranging from 16 to 32 µg ml-1 and IC50 range of 4-32 μg ml-1
against a panel of 10 distinct C. acnes isolates. Cytotoxicity against an
immortalized human keratinocyte cell line (HaCaTs) skin was detected at more than
eight times the dose required for growth inhibitory activity (IC50 of 256 μg ml-1
for 649C-F9 and IC50 of >512 μg ml-1 for 649C-F13). This work highlights the
potential of C. americana leaf extracts as a cosmeceutical ingredient for the
management of acne vulgaris. Further research is necessary to assess its
mechanism of action and in vivo efficacy.

Copyright © 2019 Pineau, Hanson, Lyles and Quave.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2019.01206 
PMCID: PMC6803531
PMID: 31680977 

