
1. Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol. 2019 Nov 1;75(Pt 11):995-1002. doi:
10.1107/S2059798319013883. Epub 2019 Oct 31.

The evolving story of AtzT, a periplasmic binding protein.

Dennis ML(1), Esquirol L(2), Nebl T(1), Newman J(1), Scott C(2), Peat TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Manufacturing Program, CSIRO, 343 Royal Parade, Parkville, VIC
3052, Australia.
(2)CSIRO Synthetic Biology Future Science Platform, GPO Box 1700, Acton,
Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.

Atrazine is an s-triazine-based herbicide that is used in many countries around
the world in many millions of tons per year. A small number of organisms, such as
Pseudomonas sp. strain ADP, have evolved to use this modified s-triazine as a
food source, and the various genes required to metabolize atrazine can be found
on a single plasmid. The atomic structures of seven of the eight proteins
involved in the breakdown of atrazine by Pseudomonas sp. strain ADP have been
determined by X-ray crystallography, but the structures of the proteins required 
by the cell to import atrazine for use as an energy source are still lacking. The
structure of AtzT, a periplasmic binding protein that may be involved in the
transport of a derivative of atrazine, 2-hydroxyatrazine, into the cell for
mineralization, has now been determined. The structure was determined by SAD
phasing using an ethylmercury phosphate derivative that diffracted X-rays to
beyond 1.9 Å resolution. `Native' (guanine-bound) and 2-hydroxyatrazine-bound
structures were also determined to high resolution (1.67 and 1.65 Å,
respectively), showing that 2-hydroxyatrazine binds in a similar way to the
purportedly native ligand. Structural similarities led to the belief that it may 
be possible to evolve AtzT from a purine-binding protein to a protein that can
bind and detect atrazine in the environment.

open access.

DOI: 10.1107/S2059798319013883 
PMCID: PMC6834077
PMID: 31692473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

