
1. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2019 Nov 1;40(6):425-428. doi: 10.2500/aap.2019.40.4263.

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Watts MM, Grammer LC.

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), also referred to as extrinsic allergic
alveolitis, is characterized by non-immunoglobulin E mediated inflammation of the
parenchyma, alveoli, and terminal airways of the lung initiated by inhaled
antigens in a susceptible host. Etiologic agents of HP are either organic
high-molecular-weight compounds (e.g., bacteria, fungi, amoebae, plant and animal
proteins) or inorganic low-molecular-weight haptens (e.g., isocyanates) and drugs
(including amiodarone, nitrofurantoin, and minocycline). Six significant
predictors have been identified that provide approximately 95% diagnostic
accuracy. These six predictors are (1) exposure to a known offending allergen,
(2) positive precipitating antibodies to the offending antigen, (3) recurrent
episodes of symptoms, (4) inspiratory crackles on lung auscultation, (5) symptoms
that occur 4-8 hours after exposure, and (6) weight loss. HP is staged into
acute, subacute, and chronic. In the acute stage, after direct exposure to the
antigen, there are fever, chills, nonproductive cough, dyspnea, malaise, and
myalgias, all of which resemble influenza. However, if obtained, a chest
radiograph demonstrates nodular infiltrates, and pulmonary function testing is
restrictive (unless the cause is avian, in which case, obstruction or obstruction
with restriction is present). In the chronic stage, fever and chills are absent, 
but weight loss can occur. The immunologic response includes activated
macrophages and CD8+ cytotoxic lymphocytes, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
reveals marked lymphocytosis with a ratio of CD4+ to CD8+ cells of <1. Activated 
macrophages have increased expression of CD80/CD86, and T cells have increased
expression of its counter-ligand, CD28, evidence for heightened antigen
presentation.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2019.40.4263 
PMID: 31690386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

