
1. Stem Cell Reports. 2019 Dec 10;13(6):1099-1110. doi:
10.1016/j.stemcr.2019.10.007. Epub 2019 Nov 7.

Effective and Rapid Generation of Functional Neutrophils from Induced Pluripotent
Stem Cells Using ETV2-Modified mRNA.

Brok-Volchanskaya VS(1), Bennin DA(2), Suknuntha K(3), Klemm LC(2), Huttenlocher 
A(2), Slukvin I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
WI 53715, USA.
(2)Departments of Pediatrics and Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University 
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(3)Wisconsin National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
WI 53715, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Wisconsin
National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin, 1220 Capitol Court,
Madison, WI 53715, USA; Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol
University, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(4)Wisconsin National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
WI 53715, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Wisconsin
National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin, 1220 Capitol Court,
Madison, WI 53715, USA; Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University
of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53707-7365, USA.
Electronic address: islukvin@wisc.edu.

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) can serve as a versatile and
scalable source of neutrophils for biomedical research and transfusion therapies.
Here we describe a rapid efficient serum- and xenogen-free protocol for
neutrophil generation, which is based on direct hematoendothelial programming of 
hiPSCs using ETV2-modified mRNA. Culture of ETV2-induced hematoendothelial
progenitors in the presence of GM-CSF, FGF2, and UM171 led to continuous
production of generous amounts of CD34+CD33+ myeloid progenitors which could be
harvested every 8-10 days for up to 30 days of culture. Subsequently, myeloid
progenitors were differentiated into neutrophils in the presence of G-CSF and the
retinoic acid agonist Am580. Neutrophils obtained in these conditions displayed a
typical somatic neutrophil morphology, produced reactive oxygen species, formed
neutrophil extracellular traps and possessed phagocytic and chemotactic
activities. Overall, this technology offers an opportunity to generate a
significant number of neutrophils as soon as 14 days after initiation of
differentiation.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2019.10.007 
PMCID: PMC6915846
PMID: 31708474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

