
1. Zool Res. 2020 Jan 18;41(1):39-50. doi: 10.24272/j.issn.2095-8137.2020.003.

D-dopachrome tautomerase from Japanese sea bass ( Lateolabrax japonicus) is a
chemokine-like cytokine and functional homolog of macrophage migration inhibitory
factor.

Xu F(1)(2), Li MY(2), Chen J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-Products, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, China.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Marine Sciences,
Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315832, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biotechnology of Ministry of Education,
Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315832, China. E-mail: jchen1975@163.com;
chenjiong@nbu.edu.cn.

D-dopachrome tautomerase (DDT), a member of the macrophage migration inhibitory
factor (MIF) protein superfamily, is a newly described cytokine with
chemokine-like characteristics. However, research on fish DDT remains limited. In
this study, we identified a DDT homolog (LjDDT) from the Japanese sea bass,
Lateolabrax japonicus. Sequence analysis showed that LjDDT had typical sequence
features of known DDT and MIF homologs and was most closely related to DDT of
rock bream ( Oplegnathus fasciatus). LjDDT transcripts were detected in all
tested tissues of healthy Japanese sea bass, with the highest expression found in
the liver. Upon infection with Vibrio harveyi, LjDDT transcripts were
significantly down-regulated in the three tested tissues, including the liver,
spleen, and head kidney. Recombinant LjDDT (rLjDDT) and the corresponding
antibody (anti-rLjDDT) were subsequently prepared. The administration of 100 μg/g
anti-rLjDDT had a statistically significant protective effect on the survival of 
V. harveyi-infected fish. Moreover, rLjDDT was able to induce the migration of
monocytes/macrophages (MO/MФ) and lymphocytes both in vitro and in vivo, but
without significant influence on the migration of neutrophils. rLjDDT exhibited
chemotactic activity for lipopolysaccharide (LPS) -stimulated M1-type MO/ MΦ in
vitro, but not for cAMP-stimulated M2-type MO/MΦ. Furthermore, the knockdown of
LjCD74, but not LjCXCR4, significantly down-regulated the rLjDDT-enhanced
migration of MO/MΦ and relieved the rLjMIF-inhibited migration of MO/MΦ. These
results indicate that LjCD74 may be the major chemotactic receptor of LjDDT and
LjMIF in Japanese sea bass MO/MΦ. Combined rLjDDT+ rLjMIF treatment had no
significant effect on the migration of MsiRNA, LjCD74si-, or LjCXCR4sitreated
MO/MΦ compared to the control group, suggesting that the roles of LjDDT and LjMIF
may be antagonistic. In conclusion, our study demonstrates for the first time
that DDT may play a role in the immune responses of fish against bacterial
infection through chemotactic recruitment of MO/MΦ via mediation of CD74 as an
antagonist of MIF.

DOI: 10.24272/j.issn.2095-8137.2020.003 
PMCID: PMC6956724
PMID: 31709785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

