
1. Environ Microbiol Rep. 2020 Feb;12(1):58-62. doi: 10.1111/1758-2229.12811. Epub
2019 Nov 27.

Growth of the acetogenic bacterium Acetobacterium woodii by dismutation of
acetaldehyde to acetate and ethanol.

Trifunović D(1), Berghaus N(1), Müller V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology & Bioenergetics, Institute of Molecular
Biosciences, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University Frankfurt/Main, Max-von-Laue-Str. 
9, 60438, Frankfurt, Germany.

Acetogenic bacteria are a group of strictly anaerobic bacteria that may have been
first life forms on Earth since they employ an ancient pathway for CO2 fixation
into acetyl-CoA that is coupled to the synthesis of ATP, the Wood-Ljungdahl
pathway. Electrons for CO2 reduction are derived from oxidation of H2 or CO and
thus, these bacteria can grow lithotrophically on gases present on early Earth.
Among the organic molecules present on early Earth is acetaldehyde, a highly
volatile C2 compound. Here, we demonstrate that the acetogenic model bacterium
Acetobacterium woodii grows on acetaldehyde. Acetaldehyde is dismutated to
ethanol and acetyl-CoA, most likely by the bifunctional alcohol dehydrogenase
AdhE. Acetyl-CoA is converted to acetate by two subsequent enzymes,
phosphotransacetylase and acetate kinase, accompanied by the synthesis of ATP by 
substrate-level phosphorylation. Apparently, growth on acetaldehyde does not
employ the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway. Our finding opens the possibility of a simple 
and ancient metabolic pathway with only three enzymes that allows for biomass
(acetyl-CoA) and ATP formation on early Earth.

© 2019 The Authors. Environmental Microbiology Reports published by Society for
Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1758-2229.12811 
PMID: 31715654 

