
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Feb;139:103867. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103867. Epub 2019
Nov 9.

Antibacterial and antibiofilm activity of bone marrow-derived human mesenchymal
stem cells secretome against Vibrio cholerae.

Bahroudi M(1), Bakhshi B(2), Soudi S(3), Najar-Peerayeh S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: b.bakhshi@modares.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.

The ability of V. cholerae to survive and spread in the aquatic environment
combined with the scarcity of effective antimicrobial agents, especially those
effective against multidrug-resistant strains highlights the need for alternative
non-antibiotic approaches for the treatment of V. cholerae infections. The aim of
this study was to specifically examine the potential direct effect of
unstimulated MSC secretome on V. cholerae killing and biofilm formation as a
representative of non-invasive enteric bacterial pathogen. The bmMSCs were
characterized by the presence of CD44 and CD73 and the absence of CD45 and CD34
molecular markers. Moreover, self-regeneration and differentiation capacity of
MSCs into adipocytes and osteogenic lineages was assessed by immunohistology
(IHC) method. The antibacterial activity of unstimulated MSCs supernatant against
V. cholerae in broth microdilution assay decreased the bacterial suspension from 
108 CFU/ml to 107 CFU/ml and showed a significant antimicrobial activity in a
dose-dependent manner at dilutions of 1:8 to 1:128 (P < 0.05). The role of MSC
secretome without preconditioning in the prevention of biofilm formation was
assessed through plate-crystal violet assay and showed high antibiofilm activity 
against V. cholerae also in dose-dependent manner. As antibacterial mechanisms of
MSC secretome are different from conventional antibiotics, together with its
antibiofilm activity, proposes its application as a novel therapeutic approach
combatting multi-drug resistant pathogens with no fear of developing
antimicrobial resistance.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103867 
PMID: 31712121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

