
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Nov 14;9(1):16850. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-53200-7.

Optimization of culture conditions for the expression of three different
insoluble proteins in Escherichia coli.

Gutiérrez-González M(1)(2), Farías C(1), Tello S(1), Pérez-Etcheverry D(3),
Romero A(1), Zúñiga R(1), Ribeiro CH(1), Lorenzo-Ferreiro C(3), Molina MC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Inmunobiotecnología, Programa Disciplinario de Inmunología,
Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile.
(2)Programa de Doctorado en Farmacología, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas y
Farmacéuticas, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Área de Biotecnología, Instituto Polo Tecnológico de Pando, Facultad de
Química, Universidad de la República Oriental del Uruguay, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(4)Centro de Inmunobiotecnología, Programa Disciplinario de Inmunología,
Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile. mcmolina@med.uchile.cl.

Recombinant protein expression for structural and therapeutic applications
requires the use of systems with high expression yields. Escherichia coli is
considered the workhorse for this purpose, given its fast growth rate and
feasible manipulation. However, bacterial inclusion body formation remains a
challenge for further protein purification. We analyzed and optimized the
expression conditions for three different proteins: an anti-MICA scFv, MICA, and 
p19 subunit of IL-23. We used a response surface methodology based on a
three-level Box-Behnken design, which included three factors: post-induction
temperature, post-induction time and IPTG concentration. Comparing this
information with soluble protein data in a principal component analysis revealed 
that insoluble and soluble proteins have different optimal conditions for
post-induction temperature, post-induction time, IPTG concentration and in amino 
acid sequence features. Finally, we optimized the refolding conditions of the
least expressed protein, anti-MICA scFv, using a fast dilution protocol with
different additives, obtaining soluble and active scFv for binding assays. These 
results allowed us to obtain higher yields of proteins expressed in inclusion
bodies. Further studies using the system proposed in this study may lead to the
identification of optimal environmental factors for a given protein sequence,
favoring the acceleration of bioprocess development and structural studies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-53200-7 
PMCID: PMC6856375
PMID: 31727948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

