
1. Methods Enzymol. 2019;629:235-256. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2019.07.006. Epub 2019 Jul
24.

Quantification of IDO1 enzyme activity in normal and malignant tissues.

Zhai L(1), Ladomersky E(1), Bell A(1), Dussold C(1), Cardoza K(1), Qian J(1),
Lauing KL(1), Wainwright DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States.
(2)Department of Neurological Surgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States; Department of Medicine-Division of
Hematology and Oncology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, United States; Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States; Robert H.
Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United
States. Electronic address: derekwainwright@northwestern.edu.

Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) catalyzes the first and rate-limiting
reaction of l-tryptophan (Trp) conversion into l-kynurenine (Kyn). The depletion 
of Trp, and the accumulation of Kyn have been proposed as mechanisms that
contribute to the suppression of the immune response-primarily evidenced by in
vitro study. IDO1 is therefore considered to be an immunosuppressive modulator
and quantification of IDO1 metabolism may be critical to understanding its role
in select immunopathologies, including autoimmune- and oncological-conditions, as
well as for determining the potency of IDO1 enzyme inhibitors. Because tryptophan
2,3-dioxygenase (TDO), and to a significantly lesser extent, IDO2, also
catabolize Trp into Kyn, it's important to differentiate the contribution of each
enzyme to Trp catabolism and Kyn generation. Moreover, a great variety of
detection methods have been developed for the quantification of Trp metabolites, 
but choosing the suitable protocol remains challenging. Here, we review the
differential expression of IDO1/TDO/IDO2 in normal and malignant tissues,
followed by a comprehensive analysis of methodologies for quantifying Trp and Kyn
in vitro and in vivo, with an emphasis on the advantages/disadvantages for each
application.

Â© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2019.07.006 
PMCID: PMC7347075
PMID: 31727243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

