
1. J Org Chem. 2019 Dec 20;84(24):16055-16067. doi: 10.1021/acs.joc.9b02550. Epub
2019 Nov 27.

Diastereoselective Synthesis of Arabino- and Ribo-like Nucleoside Analogues
Bearing a Stereogenic C3' All-Carbon Quaternary Center.

Lussier T(1)(2), Manchoju A(1)(2), Wang G(1)(2), Dostie S(1), Foster S(1),
Mochirian P(1), Prévost M(1), Guindon Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-organic Chemistry Laboratory , Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal , Montréal , Québec H2W 1R7 , Canada.
(2)Department of Chemistry , Université de Montréal , Montréal , Québec H3C 3J7 ,
Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology , University of Ottawa
, Ottawa , Ontario K1N 6N5 , Canada.

The synthesis of novel nucleoside analogues bearing a C3' all-carbon quaternary
center and a C2'-hydroxy substituent is described. The all-carbon stereogenic
center was generated through an intramolecular 7-endo attack of a silyl-tethered 
allyl moiety on a tertiary radical using photoredox catalysis. Subsequent allylic
oxidation and diastereoselective hydride reductions provided the hydroxy
substituent at C2', which then controls the stereoselective introduction of
pyrimidine nucleobases on the corresponding furanose scaffold. Density functional
theory (DFT) calculations provided insights into the origin of the high syn
diastereoselectivity resulting from the radical cyclization. This original
methodology grants access to a wide range of 1',2'-cis and 1',2'-trans arabino-
and ribo-like analogues bearing an all-carbon quaternary center at C3'. These
molecules are currently being tested for their antiviral and anticancer
properties.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.joc.9b02550 
PMID: 31729227 

