
1. Metab Eng Commun. 2019 Jul 24;9:e00096. doi: 10.1016/j.mec.2019.e00096.
eCollection 2019 Dec.

Overproduction of gentamicin B in industrial strain Micromonospora echinospora
CCTCC M 2018898 by cloning of the missing genes genR and genS.

Chang Y(1)(2), Chai B(3), Ding Y(1)(2), He M(3), Zheng L(3), Teng Y(3), Deng
Z(1)(2), Yu Y(1), Liu T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery, Ministry of
Education, Wuhan University School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wuhan, 430071,
China.
(2)Hubei Engineering Laboratory for Synthetic Microbiology, Wuhan Institute of
Biotechnology, Wuhan, 430075, China.
(3)Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Antifungal Drugs, Zhejiang Hisun Pharmaceutical Co,
Ltd, Taizhou, 318000, China.

In pharmaceutical industry, isepamicin is mainly manufactured from gentamicin B, 
which is produced by Micromonospora echinospora as a minor component of the
gentamicin complex. Improvement of gentamicin B production through metabolic
engineering is therefore important to satisfy the increasing demand for
isepamicin. We hypothesized that gentamicin B was generated from gentamicin
JI-20A via deamination of the C2' amino group. Using kanJ and kanK as the gene
probes, we identified the putative deamination-related genes, genR and genS,
through genome mining of the gentamicin B producing strain M. echinospora CCTCC M
2018898. Interestingly, genR and genS constitute a gene cassette located
approximately 28.7 kb away from the gentamicin gene cluster. Gene knockout of
genR and genS almost abolished the production of gentamicin B in the mutant
strain, suggesting that these two genes, which are responsible for the last steps
in gentamicin B biosynthesis, constitute the missing part of the known gentamicin
biosynthetic pathway. Based on these finding, we successfully constructed a
gentamicin B high-yielding strain (798 mg/L), in which an overexpression cassette
of genR and genS was introduced. Our work fills the missing piece to solve the
puzzle of gentamicin B biosynthesis and may inspire future metabolic engineering 
efforts to generate gentamycin B high-yielding strains that could eventually
satisfy the need for industrial manufacturing of isepamicin.

© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mec.2019.e00096 
PMCID: PMC6838515
PMID: 31720212 

