
1. Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jan;22(1):433-446. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.14862. Epub
2019 Dec 2.

Microbial communities of the Laurentian Great Lakes reflect connectivity and
local biogeochemistry.

Paver SF(1), Newton RJ(2), Coleman ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of the Geophysical Sciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA.
(2)School of Freshwater Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee,
WI, USA.

The Laurentian Great Lakes are a vast, interconnected freshwater system spanning 
strong physicochemical gradients, thus constituting a powerful natural laboratory
for addressing fundamental questions about microbial ecology and evolution. We
present a comparative analysis of pelagic microbial communities across all five
Laurentian Great Lakes, focusing on Bacterial and Archaeal picoplankton
characterized via 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. We collected samples throughout
the water column from the major basins of each lake in spring and summer over
2 years. Two oligotypes, classified as LD12 (Alphaproteobacteria) and acI-B1
(Actinobacteria), were among the most abundant in every sample. At the same time,
microbial communities showed distinct patterns with depth during summer
stratification. Deep hypolimnion samples were frequently dominated by a
Chloroflexi oligotype that reached up to 19% relative abundance. Stratified
surface communities differed between the colder, less productive upper lakes
(Superior, Michigan, Huron) and warmer, more productive lower lakes (Erie,
Ontario), in part due to an Actinobacteria oligotype (acI-C2) that averaged 7.7% 
of sequences in the lower lakes but <0.2% in the upper lakes. Together, our
findings suggest that both hydrologic connectivity and local selective pressures 
shape microbial communities in the Great Lakes and establish a framework for
future investigations.

© 2019 The Authors. Environmental Microbiology published by Society for Applied
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.14862 
PMCID: PMC6973239
PMID: 31736217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

