
1. Oncoimmunology. 2019 Sep 30;8(12):e1663107. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2019.1663107.
eCollection 2019.

T cell recognition of novel shared breast cancer antigens is frequently observed 
in peripheral blood of breast cancer patients.

Viborg N(1), Ramskov S(1), Andersen RS(2), Sturm T(3), Fugmann T(3), Bentzen
AK(1), Rafa VM(1), Straten PT(2)(4), Svane IM(2), Met Ö(2)(4), Hadrup SR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby,
Denmark.
(2)Center for Cancer Immune Therapy, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev,
Denmark.
(3)Philochem AG, Otelfingen, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Advances within cancer immunotherapy have fueled a paradigm shift in cancer
treatment, resulting in increasing numbers of cancer types benefitting from novel
treatment options. Despite originally being considered an immunologically silent 
malignancy, recent studies encourage the research of breast cancer immunogenicity
to evaluate immunotherapy as a treatment strategy. However, the epitope landscape
in breast cancer is minimally described, limiting the options for
antigen-specific, targeted strategies. Aromatase, never in mitosis A-related
kinase 3 (NEK3), protein inhibitor of activated STAT3 (PIAS3), and prolactin are 
known as upregulated proteins in breast cancer. In the present study, these four 
proteins are identified as novel T cell targets in breast cancer. From the four
proteins, 147 peptides were determined to bind HLA-A*0201 and -B*0702 using a
combined in silico/in vitro affinity screening. T cell recognition of all 147
peptide-HLA-A*0201/-B*0702 combinations was assessed through the use of a novel
high-throughput method utilizing DNA barcode labeled multimers. T cell
recognition of sequences within all four proteins was demonstrated in peripheral 
blood of patients, and significantly more T cell responses were detected in
patients compared to healthy donors for both HLA-A*0201 and -B*0702. Notably,
several of the identified responses were directed toward peptides, with a
predicted low or intermediate binding affinity. This demonstrates the importance 
of including low-affinity binders in the search for epitopes within shared tumor 
associated antigens (TAAs), as these might be less subject to immune tolerance
mechanisms. The study presents four novel TAAs containing multiple possible
targets for immunotherapy of breast cancer.

© 2019 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2019.1663107 
PMCID: PMC6844330
PMID: 31741759 

