
1. Oncoimmunology. 2019 Oct 11;8(12):e1672494. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2019.1672494.
eCollection 2019.

Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes from human prostate tumors reveal anti-tumor
reactivity and potential for adoptive cell therapy.

Yunger S(1), Bar El A(1)(2), Zeltzer LA(1), Fridman E(3)(4), Raviv G(2), Laufer
M(2), Schachter J(1), Markel G(1)(5), Itzhaki O(1), Besser MJ(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Ella Lemelbaum Institute for Immuno Oncology, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan,
Israel.
(2)Department of Urology, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(3)Department of Pathology, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(4)The Sackler Medical of School, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology,Sackler School of Medicine,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Advanced prostate cancer remains incurable and is the second leading cause of
mortality in men. Immunotherapy based on the adoptive transfer of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) has demonstrated promising clinical results 
in patients with metastatic melanoma and lately also in other solid tumors.
However, the ability to obtain TIL from patients with prostate cancer, considered
poorly immunogenic, remains unknown. In this study, we investigate the
feasibility of isolating and expanding TIL from primary prostate tumors. We
collected tumor specimens from eight patients with diagnosed prostate
adenocarcinoma undergoing radical prostatectomy and were able to successfully
expand multiple autologous TIL cultures from all patients. Twenty-eight
prostate-TIL cultures were further expanded using a standard rapid expansion
procedure under Good Manufacturing Practice conditions. TIL cultures were
phenotypically characterized for T cell subset composition, differentiation
status and co-inhibitory/stimulatory markers such as PD-1, TIM-3, LAG-3, and CD28
and were found to have in general similarity to TIL obtained from patients with
melanoma and lung carcinoma previously treated at our center. All analyzed TIL
cultures were functional as determined by the capability to produce high level of
IFNγ upon stimuli. Most importantly, co-culture assays of prostate-TIL with
autologous tumors demonstrated anti-tumor reactivity. In conclusion, these
findings demonstrate that functional and anti-tumor reactive TIL can be obtained,
despite the immunosuppressive microenvironment of the cancer, thus this study
supports the development of TIL therapy for prostate cancer patients.

© 2019 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2019.1672494 
PMCID: PMC6844325
PMID: 31741775 

