
1. Oncoimmunology. 2019 Sep 28;8(12):e1665975. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2019.1665975.
eCollection 2019.

IFNβ-producing CX3CR1+ macrophages promote T-regulatory cell expansion and tumor 
growth in the APCmin/+ / Bacteroides fragilis colon cancer model.

Gu T(1), Li Q(1), Egilmez NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA.

Increased T-regulatory cell activity drives tumor progression in the compound
APCmin/+/enterotoxic Bacteroides fragilis colon cancer model. At the same time,
how microbially-induced inflammation promotes T-regulatory cell expansion in the 
dysplastic intestine remains poorly described. Analysis of post-infection immune 
cell kinetics in the colon lamina propria revealed that CD4+ Foxp3+ cell numbers 
increased by 25-fold between days 3-14. Importantly, T-regulatory cell expansion 
was preceded by a 12-fold spike in lamina propria CD11b+ cell numbers between
days 0-4; suggesting a link between the myeloid compartment and the T-regulatory 
cells. Consistent with this notion, in vitro co-culture studies utilizing sorted 
myeloid cell subsets and CD4+ T-cells demonstrated that the CD11b+CX3CR1+ but not
the CD11b+CX3CR1- subset preferentially induced Foxp3 expression in CD4+ T-cells.
Phenotypic analysis revealed that the CD11b+CX3CR1+ subset represented a
homogenous CD64+CD24-CD103a- macrophage population. Global CX3CR1 knockout or
conditional depletion of CX3CR1+ myeloid cells resulted in diminished CD4+Foxp3+ 
cell expansion and a 3 to 6-fold reduction in tumor burden establishing CX3CR1+
macrophages as a major driver of the T-regulatory cell-tumor axis. Quantitative
analysis of CD11b+ myeloid cell subsets for IFNβ mRNA revealed that the CX3CR1+
macrophages expressed 15-fold higher levels of IFNβ in comparison to the CX3CR1- 
myeloid subset. Antibody mediated neutralization of IFNβ resulted in the
suppression of CD4+Foxp3+ cell induction and tumor growth, demonstrating the
central role of IFNβ in mediating CX3CR1+ macrophage-driven T-regulatory cell
expansion. These studies shed new mechanistic light on the cellular ontogeny of
pro-tumorigenic T-regulatory cells in the inflamed colon of the APCmin/+ mouse.

© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Taylor & Francis.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2019.1665975 
PMCID: PMC6844303
PMID: 31741765 

