
1. Vet Microbiol. 2019 Dec;239:108480. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2019.108480. Epub 2019 
Nov 7.

Experimental study for evaluation of the efficacy of a biofilm-embedded
bacteria-based vaccine against Staphylococcus chromogenes-associated mastitis in 
sheep.

Vasileiou NGC(1), Cripps PJ(2), Ioannidi KS(1), Katsafadou AI(1), Chatzopoulos
DC(1), Barbagianni MS(1), Tsioli V(1), Dermisiadou E(1), Karavanis E(3),
Papadopoulos N(3), Lianou DT(1), Mavrogianni VS(1), Petinaki E(4), Fthenakis
GC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Faculty, University of Thessaly, 43100, Karditsa, Greece.
(2)Institute of Veterinary Science, University of Liverpool, Neston, South
Wirral, CH64 7TE, United Kingdom.
(3)3rd Veterinary Hospital of Hellenic Army, 57100 Thermi, Greece.
(4)University Hospital of Larissa, 41110 Larissa, Greece.
(5)Veterinary Faculty, University of Thessaly, 43100, Karditsa, Greece.
Electronic address: gcf@vet.uth.gr.

Although coagulase-negative staphylococci are the primary aetiological agents of 
subclinical mastitis in ewes, there is little information regarding vaccination
against that infection. The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy 
of a vaccine against staphylococcal mastitis in ewes under experimental
conditions. The antigen in the vaccine is based on a bacterin of Staphylococcus
aureus strain, expressing the exopolysaccharide poly-N-acetylglucosamine (PNAG), 
which is involved in biofilm formation by these bacteria. Ewes in groups A
(n = 17) or B (n = 6) were given an initial vaccination 5 weeks before expected
lambing, followed by a repeat administration 21 days later. Ewes in groups C
(n = 8) or D (n = 6) were unvaccinated controls. Ewes in group A (n = 17) or C
(n = 8) were challenged with a biofilm-forming S. chromogenes; animals in
subgroups A1 or C1 were challenged on the 10th and those in A2 or C2 on the 50th 
day after lambing. Ewes in groups B or D were uninoculated controls. Clinical
examinations of ewes, ultrasonographic examinations of udder, milk yield
measurements, blood sampling for detection of anti-PNAG specific antibodies and
milk sample collection for bacteriological and cytological examinations were
performed up to 52nd day post-challenge. Finally, biopsies were performed for
mammary tissue collection for histopathological examination. Among group A ewes, 
29% developed systemic signs and 59% signs in the inoculated gland; the
respective figures for group C were 50% and 100% (P =  0.040 for mammary signs). 
The median total clinical score was 2.0 for A and 5.5 for C ewes (P =  0.025).
For A, but not for C, clinical scores decreased progressively during the study
(P =  0.018 and P =  0.47, respectively). The duration of mastitis was shorter in
A (4 days) than in C (17.5 days) ewes (P =  0.022). Bacterial counts were lower
in milk samples from A than from C ewes, for samples collected from the
inoculated and the uninoculated (P <  0.01) mammary glands of these ewes. Somatic
cell counts in samples from inoculated and uninoculated mammary glands of A ewes 
were higher than in samples of C ewes (P <  0.02). There were differences for
gray-scale evaluations during ultrasonographic examination and for milk yield
measurements between groups (P <  0.01). Median bacterial counts in tissue
samples from A ewes (0 cfu g-1) were lower than in ones from C (6.5 cfu g-1) ewes
(P =  0.041). The median score for histopathological findings in tissue samples
from inoculated glands of A was lower than that for C ewes: 1 versus 2 (P = 
0.014). It is concluded that mastitis was less severe in vaccinated animals, as
indicated by a wide array of measures.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2019.108480 
PMID: 31767091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

