
1. J Chromatogr A. 2020 Mar 29;1615:460734. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2019.460734. Epub 
2019 Nov 26.

Simultaneous detection of different bacteria by microchip electrophoresis
combined with universal primer-duplex polymerase chain reaction.

Luo F(1), Li Z(1), Dai G(1), Lu Y(1), He P(1), Wang Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China Normal University,
500 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200241, PR China.
(2)School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China Normal University,
500 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200241, PR China. Electronic address:
qjwang@chem.ecnu.edu.cn.

The specific and sensitive detection of multiple pathogens is critical for the
prevention and identification of health- and safety-related problems. A microchip
electrophoresis/LED-induced fluorescence (MCE-LIF) method, combining an
aptamer-based probe and a novel universal primer-duplex polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) process (UP-DPCR), was designed to simultaneously detect two kinds of
bacteria. The probe consists of a recognition unit (aptamer) for specifically
capturing bacterial cells and eventually releasing complementary DNAs (C1 and
C2). The two released DNA strands (C1 and C2) can be simultaneously amplified by 
a pair of universal primers, because of the identical sequences designed at both 
ends of the two DNA strands. The UP-DPCR products of C1 and C2 can be separated
and detected by MCE-LIF, and the heights of the two peaks are correlated with the
concentrations of the corresponding bacteria. Here, Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) were
detected as a proof of concept. Under optimal conditions, the limits of detection
(S/N  = 3) were 15 CFU mL-1 for S. Typhimurium and 5 CFU mL-1 for P. aeruginosa. 
This approach was also applied for detecting these two types of bacteria in
defatted milk, indicating its potential application in the analysis of real
samples. This method can not only simultaneously detect two kinds of bacteria
without lysing the bacterial cells, but also simplify duplex PCR with the use of 
universal primers.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chroma.2019.460734 
PMID: 31791592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have declared no conflict of interest.

