
1. J Clin Periodontol. 2020 Mar;47(3):309-318. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.13227. Epub 2020
Jan 7.

Gingival tissue human beta-defensin levels in relation to infection and
inflammation.

Özdemir M(1)(2), Caglayan F(2), Bikker FJ(3), Pussinen P(4), Könönen E(1)(5),
Yamalik N(2), Gürsoy M(1), Fteita D(1), Nazmi K(3), Güncü GN(2), Pietiäinen M(4),
Tolvanen M(1), Gürsoy UK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Institute of Dentistry, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland.
(2)Department of Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, Hacettepe University,
Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam, Free
University and University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Diseases, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Oral Health Care, Welfare Division, City of Turku, Turku, Finland.

AIM: To profile gingival tissue levels of human beta-defensin (hBD)-2 and hBD-3
in relation to gingival inflammation, Th17-related cytokine concentrations,
Porphyromonas gingivalis counts, and gingipain and total protease activities.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gingival tissue and subgingival plaque samples were
collected from 21 periodontitis patients including 48 periodontal pocket sites
with marginal, mild, or moderate to severe inflammation. hBD levels were
determined by immunodetection, P. gingivalis counts with real-time polymerase
chain reaction, protease activities with fluorogenic substrates, and cytokine
concentrations with Luminex technique. Data were statistically analysed using
Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney U tests and Spearman correlation coefficients.
RESULTS: Subgingival plaque counts of P. gingivalis (p = .001) and gingipain
activity (p < .001), as well as interleukin (IL)-1β (p = .012), IL-10 (p = .024),
IL-17A (p = .002), IL-17F (p = .006), and IL-23 (p = .036) concentrations were
elevated in severely inflamed sites, whereas no change was observed in hBD-2 and 
hBD-3 levels. Negative correlations were found between protease activity and
hBD-2 (p = .033) and hBD-3(p = .003) levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Shift in gingival inflammation from marginal to mild stage is
related to elevations in subgingival plaque P. gingivalis counts and gingipain
activity, but not to tissue hBD levels. Negative correlations between hBDs and
total protease activity suggest the degradation of these antimicrobial peptides
in progressed inflammation.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpe.13227 
PMID: 31799742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

