
1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Jan;51(1):110-120. doi: 10.1111/apt.15561. Epub 2019
Dec 3.

The therapeutic efficacy of Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12® in
infant colic: A randomised, double blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Nocerino R(1)(2), De Filippis F(3)(4), Cecere G(1), Marino A(1), Micillo M(1), Di
Scala C(1)(2), de Caro C(5), Calignano A(5), Bruno C(1)(2), Paparo L(1)(2),
Iannicelli AM(1), Cosenza L(1)(2), Maddalena Y(1)(2), Della Gatta G(1)(2),
Coppola S(1)(2), Carucci L(1)(2), Ercolini D(3)(4), Berni Canani R(1)(2)(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples Federico II,
Naples, Italy.
(2)CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples,
Italy.
(3)Department of Agricultural Sciences, University of Naples Federico II,
Portici, Italy.
(4)Task Force on Microbiome Studies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples,
Italy.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(6)European Laboratory for the Investigation of Food-Induced Diseases, University
of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Comment in
    Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Feb;51(3):398-399.
    Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Feb;51(3):397-398.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of infant colic is poorly defined. Gut microbiota
seems to be involved, supporting the potential therapeutic role of probiotics.
AIMS: To assess the rate of infants with a reduction of ≥50% of mean daily crying
duration after 28 days of intervention with the probiotic Bifidobacterium
animalis subsp. lactis BB-12® (BB-12). Secondary outcomes were daily number of
crying episodes, sleeping time, number of bowel movements and stool consistency.
METHODS: Randomized controlled trial (RCT) on otherwise healthy exclusively
breastfed infants with infant colic randomly allocated to receive BB-12 (1 × 109 
 CFU/day) or placebo for 28 days. Gut microbiota structure and butyrate,
beta-defensin-2 (HBD-2), cathelicidin (LL-37), secretory IgA (sIgA) and faecal
calprotectin levels were assessed.
RESULTS: Eighty infants were randomised, 40/group. The rate of infants with
reduction of ≥50% of mean daily crying duration was higher in infants treated
with BB-12, starting from the end of 2nd week. No infant relapsed when treatment 
was stopped. The mean number of crying episodes decreased in both groups, but
with a higher effect in BB-12 group (-4.7 ± 3.4 vs -2.3 ± 2.2, P < 0.05). Mean
daily stool frequency decreased in both groups but the effect was significantly
higher in the BB-12 group; stool consistency was similar between the two groups. 
An increase in Bifidobacterium abundance (with significant correlation with
crying time reduction), butyrate and HBD-2, LL-37, sIgA levels associated with a 
decrease in faecal calprotectin level were observed in the BB-12 group.
CONCLUSIONS: Supplementation with BB-12 is effective in managing infant colic.
The effect could derive from immune and non-immune mechanisms associated with a
modulation of gut microbiota structure and function.

© 2019 The Authors. Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics Published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apt.15561 
PMCID: PMC6973258
PMID: 31797399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

