
1. mBio. 2019 Dec 3;10(6). pii: e01856-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01856-19.

Embryonic Cells Redistribute SUMO1 upon Forced SUMO1 Overexpression.

Lee A(1), Zhu Y(2)(3), Sabo Y(4), Goff SP(5)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Columbia
University Medical Center, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Columbia University Medical Center, Columbia University, New York, New
York, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Columbia University Medical Center, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Columbia University
Medical Center, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Columbia University Medical Center, Columbia University, New York, New
York, USA spg1@cumc.columbia.edu.

Conjugation of small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) to substrate proteins is a 
posttranslational protein modification that affects a diverse range of
physiological processes. Global inhibition of SUMO conjugation in mice results in
embryonic lethality, reflecting the importance of the SUMO pathways for embryonic
development. Here, we demonstrated that SUMO1 overexpression was not well
tolerated in murine embryonic carcinoma and embryonic stem (ES) cells and that
only a few clones were recovered after transduction with vectors delivering SUMO1
expression constructs. Differentiated NIH/3T3 cells overexpress SUMO1 without
deleterious effects and maintain high levels of both conjugated and free forms of
SUMO1. The few embryonic cells surviving after forced overexpression retained all
their SUMO1 in the form of a few high-molecular-weight conjugates and maintained 
undetectable levels of free SUMO1. The absence of free SUMO in embryonic cells
was seen specifically upon overexpression of SUMO1, but not SUMO2. Moreover,
blocking SUMO1 conjugation to endogenous substrates by C-terminal mutations of
SUMO1 or by overexpression of a SUMO1 substrate "sponge" or by overexpression of 
the deSUMOylating enzyme SUMO-specific peptidase 1 (SENP1) dramatically restored 
free SUMO1 overexpression. The data suggest that overexpression of SUMO1 protein 
leading to an excess accumulation of critical SUMO1-conjugated substrates is not 
tolerated in embryonic cells. Surviving embryonic cells exhibit SUMO1 conjugation
to allowed substrates but a complete absence of free SUMO1.IMPORTANCE Embryonic
stem (ES) cells exhibit unusual transcriptional, proteomic, and signal response
profiles, reflecting their unusual needs for rapid differentiation and
replication. The work reported here demonstrated that mouse embryonic cell lines 
did not tolerate the overexpression of SUMO1, the small ubiquitin-like modifier
protein that is covalently attached to many substrates to alter their
intracellular localization and functionality. Forced SUMO1 overexpression is
toxic to ES cells, and surviving cell populations adapt by dramatically reducing 
the levels of free SUMO1. Such a response is not seen in differentiated cells or 
with SUMO2 or with nonconjugatable SUMO1 mutants or in the presence of a SUMO1
"sponge" substrate that accepts the modification. The findings suggest that
excess SUMO1 modification of specific substrates is not tolerated by embryonic
cells and highlight a distinctive need for these cells to control the levels of
SUMO1 available for conjugation.

Copyright Â© 2019 Lee et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01856-19 
PMCID: PMC6890988
PMID: 31796536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

