
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Dec 2;9(1):18026. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-54579-z.

Upregulation of vitamin D-binding protein is associated with changes in insulin
production in pancreatic beta-cells exposed to p,p'-DDT and p,p'-DDE.

Pavlíková N(1), Daniel P(2), Šrámek J(2), Jelínek M(2), Šrámková V(3), Němcová
V(2), Balušíková K(2), Halada P(4), Kovář J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology & Center for Research
of Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic. nela.pavlikova@lf3.cuni.cz.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology & Center for Research
of Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology & Center for Research of Diabetes, Metabolism,
and Nutrition, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech
Republic.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Structure Characterization, Institute of Microbiology 
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic.

Persistent organochlorine pollutants (POPs) gradually accumulate in the human
organism due to their presence in the environment. Some studies have described a 
correlation between the level of POPs in the human body and the incidence of
diabetes, but we know little about the direct effect of POPs on pancreatic
beta-cells. We exposed pancreatic beta-cells INS1E to non-lethal concentrations
of p,p'-DDT (1,1'-(2,2,2-Trichloroethane-1,1-diyl)bis(4-chlorobenzene)) and
p,p'-DDE (1,1'-(2,2-dichloroethene-1,1-diyl)bis(4-chlorobenzene)) for 1 month,
and assessed changes in protein expression and the intracellular insulin level.
2-D electrophoresis revealed 6 proteins with changed expression in cells exposed 
to p,p'-DDT or p,p'-DDE. One of the detected proteins - vitamin D-binding protein
(VDBP) - was upregulated in both cells exposed to p,p'-DDT, and cells exposed to 
p,p'-DDE. Both exposures to pollutants reduced the intracellular level of insulin
mRNA, proinsulin, and insulin monomer; p,p'-DDT also slightly reduced the level
of hexameric insulin. Overexpression of VDBP caused by the stable transfection of
beta-cells with the gene for VDBP decreased both the proinsulin and hexameric
insulin level in beta-cells similarly to the reduction detected in cells exposed 
to p,p'-DDT. Our data suggest that in the cells exposed to p,p'-DDT and p,p'-DDE,
the increased VDBP protein level decreased the proinsulin expression in an
unknown mechanism.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-54579-z 
PMCID: PMC6889289
PMID: 31792309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

