
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Feb;139:103910. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103910. Epub 2019
Dec 3.

Understanding the pathogenesis of Flavobacterium psychrophilum using the rainbow 
trout monocyte/macrophage-like cell line, RTS11, as an infection model.

Semple SL(1), Bols NC(1), Lumsden JS(2), Dixon B(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Waterloo, Department of Biology, Waterloo, Canada.
(2)University of Guelph, Ontario Veterinary College, Department of Pathobiology, 
Guelph, Canada.
(3)University of Waterloo, Department of Biology, Waterloo, Canada. Electronic
address: bdixon@uwaterloo.ca.

The life cycle of Flavobacterium psychrophilum (Fp), the causative agent of
bacterial coldwater disease (BCWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS), appears
to involve interactions with spleen and head kidney macrophages. To develop an in
vitro model for studying this, F. psychrophilum was incubated with a rainbow
trout splenic monocyte/macrophage-like cell line (RTS11) and fundamental
macrophage functions evaluated. The animal cell basal medium, L15, supplemented
with bovine serum (FBS) supports RTS11 maintenance, and surprisingly, L15 with 2%
FBS (L15/FBS) also supported F. psychrophilum growth. L15/FBS in which the
bacteria had been grown is referred to as F. psychrophilum conditioned medium
(FpCM). Adding FpCM to RTS11 cultures caused a small, yet significant, percentage
of cells to die, many cells to become more diffuse, and phagocytosis to be
temporarily reduced. FpCM also significantly stimulated transcript expression for
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, TNFα and IL-6) and the anti-inflammatory
cytokine (IL-10) after one day of exposure but this upregulation rapidly declined
over time. Adding live F. psychrophilum to RTS11 cultures also altered the
cellular morphology and stimulated cytokine expression more profoundly than FpCM.
Additionally, the phagocytic activity of RTS11 was also significantly impaired by
live F. psychrophilum, but not to the same extent as when exposed to FpCM. Adding
heat-killed bacteria to RTS11 cultures elicited few changes. These bacteria/RTS11
co-cultures should be useful for gaining a deeper understanding of the
pathogenesis of F. psychrophilum and may aid in the development of effective
measures to prevent infection and spread of this troublesome disease.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103910 
PMID: 31809795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

