
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Feb 3;86(4). pii: e01913-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01913-19. Print 2020 Feb 3.

A Comprehensive Account of Escherichia coli Sequence Type 131 in Wastewater
Reveals an Abundance of Fluoroquinolone-Resistant Clade A Strains.

Finn TJ(1), Scriver L(1), Lam L(1)(2), Duong M(1), Peirano G(1)(3), Lynch T(3),
Dong T(1)(2), Pitout JDD(1)(3), DeVinney R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Infectious Diseases, Cummings School 
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Ecosystem and Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Alberta Public Laboratories, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Infectious Diseases, Cummings School 
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
rdevinne@ucalgary.ca.

In the ten years since its discovery, the Escherichia coli clone sequence type
131 (ST131) has become a major international health threat, with the
multidrug-resistant and extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing clade C
emerging as the globally dominant form. ST131 has previously been isolated from
wastewater; however, most of these studies selectively screened for
ESBL-producing organisms, thereby missing the majority of remaining ST131 clades.
In this study, we used a high-throughput PCR-based screening strategy to
comprehensively examine wastewater for the presence of ST131 over a 1-year
period. Additional multiplex PCRs were used to differentiate clades and obtain an
unbiased account of the total ST131 population structure within the collection.
Furthermore, antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of all ST131-positive samples 
were tested against a range of commonly used antibiotics. From a total of over
3,762 E. coli wastewater samples, 1.86% (n = 70) tested positive for ST131, with 
the majority being clade A isolates. In total, 63% (n = 44) were clade A, 29%
(n = 20) were clade B, 1% (n = 1) were clade C0, 6% (n = 4) were clade C1, and 1%
(n = 1) were clade C2. In addition, a very high rate of resistance to commonly
used antibiotics among wastewater isolates is reported, with 72.7% (n = 32) of
clade A resistant to ciprofloxacin and high rates of resistance to gentamicin,
sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, and tetracycline in clades that are typically
sensitive to antibiotics.IMPORTANCE ST131 is a global pathogen. This clone causes
urinary tract infections and is frequently isolated from human sources. However, 
little is known about ST131 from environmental sources. With the widely reported 
increase in antibiotic concentrations found in wastewater, there is additional
selection pressure for the emergence of antibiotic-resistant ST131 in this niche.
The unbiased screening approach reported herein revealed that previously
antibiotic-sensitive lineages of ST131 are now resistant to commonly used
antibiotics present in wastewater systems and may be capable of surviving UV
sterilization. This is the most comprehensive account of ST131 in the wastewater 
niche to date and an important step in better understanding the ecology of this
global pathogen.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01913-19 
PMCID: PMC6997739
PMID: 31811043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

