
1. Immunobiology. 2020 Jan;225(1):151860. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2019.10.009. Epub
2019 Nov 4.

A combination of check-point blockade and α-galactosylceramide elicits
long-lasting suppressive effects on murine hepatoma cell growth in vivo.

Ishii K(1), Shimizu M(2), Kogo H(3), Negishi Y(4), Tamura H(5), Morita R(6),
Takahashi H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5
Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8602, Japan. Electronic address: kxi@nms.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5
Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8602, Japan. Electronic address: kita-g@nms.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5
Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8602, Japan. Electronic address: s8037@nms.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5
Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8602, Japan. Electronic address: negi@nms.ac.jp.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5
Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8602, Japan. Electronic address: tam@nms.ac.jp.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5
Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8602, Japan. Electronic address: morita@nms.ac.jp.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5
Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8602, Japan. Electronic address:
htkuhkai@nms.ac.jp.

Immunotherapy for cancer cells induced by interfering with PD-1/PD-L1 engagement 
via check-point blockades was initiated by tumour-specific PD-1+ CD8+ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) within a tumour mass and eliminate the tumour. Here, we used
C57BL/6 (B6) mice implanted with the syngeneic hepatoma cell line Hepa1-6-1, and 
confirmed that the dendritic cells (DCs) within Hepa1-6-1 tumour mass were
tolerogenic with downmodulated co-stimulatory molecules by tumour-derived
factors. Although Hepa1-6-1 cells did not prime tumour-specific CTLs within the
tumour, specific CTLs primed in the regional lymph nodes seemed to be invaded
into the tumour mass. The specific CTLs gained PD-1+ expression when associated
with PD-L1+ Hepa1-6-1 cells within the tumour mass. Their cytotoxic activity in
vivo was revitalised after intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration of the anti-PD-1
monoclonal antibody (mAb), indicating that PD-1/PD-L1 engagement within the
tumour was abrogated by check-point blockade. Nonetheless, the tolerogenic DCs
within the Hepa1-6-1 tumour mass remained tolerogenic even after three shots of
PD-1-blockade administration, and the suppressed Hepa1-6-1 growth was revisited. 
In this study, we show here an excellent therapeutic effect consisting of three
injections of anti-PD1 mAb and the sequential administration of the CD1d
molecule-restricted ligand α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer), an immuno-potent
lipid/glycolipid, which converts tolerogenic DCs into immunogenic DCs with
upregulated expression of co-stimulatory molecules. The α-GalCer-activated DCs
secreted a large amount of IL-12, which can activate tumour-specific CTLs in
vivo. The check-point blockade was not sufficiently effective, but the dose
needed for tumour eradication was reduced by 90% when tumour-bearing mice were
also administered i.p. α-GalCer.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2019.10.009 
PMID: 31812347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.

