
1. EJIFCC. 2019 Nov 25;30(4):371-384. eCollection 2019 Nov.

Flow Cytometric Analysis of Monocytes Polarization and Reprogramming From
Inflammatory to Immunosuppressive Phase During Sepsis.

Greco M(1), Mazzei A(2), Palumbo C(1), Verri T(2), Lobreglio G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pathology and Microbiology Laboratory, Vito Fazzi General Hospital
ASL-Lecce, Lecce, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Physiology, Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences 
and Technologies (DeBEST), University of Salento, Lecce, Italy.

Sepsis outcome is determined by a balance between inflammation and immune
suppression. We aimed to evaluate monocytes polarization and reprogramming during
these processes. We analyzed 93 patients with procalcitonin level >0.5 ng/mL
(hPCT) and suspected/confirmed sepsis, and 84 controls by analysis of CD14, CD16 
and HLA-DR expression on blood monocytes using fluorescent labeled monoclonal
antibodies and BD FACS CANTO II. Complete blood cell count, procalcitonin and
other biochemical markers were evaluated. Intermediate monocytes CD14++CD16+
increased in hPCT patients (including both positive and negative culture)
compared to controls (13.6% ± 0.8 vs 6.2% ± 0.3, p<0.001), while classical
monocytes CD14++CD16-were significantly reduced (72.5% ± 1.6 vs 82.6% ± 0.7,
p<0.001). Among hPCT patients having positive microbial culture, the percentage
of intermediate monocytes was significantly higher in septic compared with
non-septic/localized-infection patients (17.4% vs 11.5%; p<0.05) whilst the
percentage of classical monocytes was lower (68.0% vs 74.5%). Three-four days
following the diagnosis of sepsis, HLA-DR expression on monocyte (mHLA-DR) was
lower (94.3%) compared to controls (99.4%) (p<0.05). Septic patients with the
worst clinical conditions showed higher incidence of secondary infections,
longtime hospitalization and lower HLA-DR+ monocytes compared to septic patients 
with better clinical outcome (88.4% vs 98.6%, p=0.05). The dynamic nature of
sepsis correlates with monocytes functional polarization and reprogramming from a
pro-inflammatory CD14++CD16+ phenotype in non-septic hPCT patients to a decrease 
of HLA-DR surface expression in hPCT patients with confirmed sepsis, making
HLA-DR reduction a marker of immune-paralysis and sepsis outcome. Analysis of
monocytes plasticity opens to new mechanisms responsible for
pro/anti-inflammatory responses during sepsis, and new immunotherapies.

Copyright © 2019 International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory
Medicine (IFCC). All rights reserved.


PMCID: PMC6893894
PMID: 31814812 

