
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2020 Jan;27(1):882-889. doi:
10.1007/s11356-019-07007-8. Epub 2019 Dec 9.

Histological features of Rickettsia-like organisms in the European flat oyster
(Ostrea edulis L.).

Tinelli A(1), Santacroce MP(2), Passantino G(2), Patruno R(3), Desantis S(4),
Leone R(2), Gorgoni P(2), Zizzo N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinary Pathology and Comparative
Oncology Unit, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Valenzano, 70010, Bari, Italy.
antonella.tinelli@uniba.it.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinary Pathology and Comparative
Oncology Unit, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Valenzano, 70010, Bari, Italy.
(3)Unit of Animal Health, ASL BAT, Corso Imbriani, 113, Trani, Italy.
(4)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplants (DETO), Section of Veterinary
Science and Animal Production, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Valenzano, 70010,
Bari, Italy.

The European flat oyster (Ostrea edulis L.) represents an economically important 
oyster production in Southern Italy, widespread in natural beds along the coast. 
The practice to be eaten raw is an everlasting concern for possible health risk
with a need to stringently monitor the health of aquatic environment. A screening
survey using histopathological examination was undertaken by harvesting O. edulis
from different sites along the Apulian coast of Italy. Tissue samples of the
digestive gland, kidney, gonad, and gill were provided for morphologic study in
light microscopy (LM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) analysis. The LM observations revealed spherical
cytoplasmic inclusions as basophilic prokaryote colonies in 13/250 oysters. The
TEM and SEM confirmed the presence of intracytoplasmic inclusions of
Rickettsia-like organisms (RLOs), merely in the epithelial cells of the digestive
gland tubule tissues in the 13 oysters. Within intracytoplasmic vacuoles, RLOs
exhibited a prokaryotic characteristic ultrastructure with transverse binary
fission, a DNA zone full of chromatin fibers and a granular periplasmic ribosome 
zone. O. edulis were found positive for RLOs in wild oysters from Manfredonia,
while the other sites were found free of pathological inclusions. Thus, we
present the first report of a Rickettsia-like infection in the Apulian wild
oyster (O. edulis) from Italy, including an ultrastructural description and
pathological characterization.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-019-07007-8 
PMID: 31820245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

