
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Nov 21;10:2671. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02671. eCollection 
2019.

Seasonal Variation and Crop Sequences Shape the Structure of Bacterial
Communities in Cysts of Soybean Cyst Nematode.

Hu W(1)(2), Strom NB(1), Haarith D(3), Chen S(3)(4), Bushley KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of Minnesota, Saint
Paul, MN, United States.
(2)Department of Entomology and Nematology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL, United States.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, MN, United
States.
(4)Southern Research and Outreach Center, University of Minnesota, Waseca, MN,
United States.

Soybean cyst nematode (SCN), Heterodera glycines Ichinohe, is the number 1
pathogen of the important economic crop soybean. Bacteria represent potential
biocontrol agents of the SCN, but few studies have characterized the dynamics of 
bacterial communities associated with cysts under different crop rotation
sequences. The bacterial communities in SCN cysts in a long-term soybean-corn
crop rotation experiment were investigated over 2 years. The crop sequences
included long-term soybean monoculture (Ss), years 1-5 of soybean following 5
years corn (S1-S5), years 1 and 2 of corn following 5 years soybean (C1 and C2), 
and soybean-corn annual rotation (Sa and Ca). The bacterial 16S rRNA V4 region
was amplified from DNA isolated from SCN cysts collected in spring at planting,
midseason (2 months later), and fall at harvest and sequenced on the Illumina
MiSeq platform. The SCN cyst microbiome was dominated by Proteobacteria followed 
by Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Verrucomicrobia. The bacterial community
composition was influenced by both crop sequence and season. Although differences
by crop sequence were not significant in the spring of each year, bacterial
communities in cysts from annual rotation (Sa and Ca) or crop sequences of early 
years of monoculture following a 5-year rotation of the alternate crop (S1 and
C1) became rapidly differentiated by crop over a single growing season. In the
fall, genera of cyst bacteria associated with soybean crop sequences included
Rhizobacter, Leptothrix, Cytophaga, Chitinophaga, Niastella, Streptomyces, and
Halangium. The discovery of diverse bacterial taxa in SCN cysts and their
dynamics across crop rotation sequences provides invaluable information for
future development of biological control of the SCN.

Copyright Â© 2019 Hu, Strom, Haarith, Chen and Bushley.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02671 
PMCID: PMC6882411
PMID: 31824456 

