
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2020 Jul;52(4):1609-1615. doi: 10.1007/s11250-019-02163-y.
Epub 2019 Dec 13.

Manipulating rumen fermentation, microbial protein synthesis, and mitigating
methane production using bamboo grass pellet in swamp buffaloes.

Suriyapha C(1), Ampapon T(1), Viennasay B(1), Matra M(1), Wann C(1), Wanapat
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand.
(2)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand. metha@kku.ac.th.

Bamboo grass (Tiliacora triandra Diels) pellet (BP) was assessed as a rumen
modifier on feed intake, rumen fermentation, nutrient digestibilities, microbial 
population, and methane production in swamp buffaloes. Four male swamp buffaloes 
with 350 ± 10 kg of body weight (BW) were allotted according to a 2 × 2 factorial
arrangement in a 4 × 4 Latin square design. The treatments were as follows:
roughage to concentrate ratio (R:C) at 70:30 (T1), R:C at 70:30 with BP
supplementation at 150 g/day (T2), R:C at 30:70 (T3), and R:C at 30:70 with BP
supplementation at 150 g/day (T4). All animals were restricted to 2.5% of BW. The
findings revealed that ruminal pH was reduced by the R:C at 30:70 fed groups (T3,
T4); however, the rumen pH was enhanced (P < 0.05) in BP supplemented (T4) and
there was an interaction between R:C and BP groups (P < 0.05). The propionate
(C3) concentration was increased by the R:C ratio at 30:70 and BP fed groups
(P < 0.01), and it was the highest at R:C ratio of 30:70 with BP supplemented
group. Total VFA and buterate (C4) concentation were not changed (P > 0.05),
while acetate (C2) concentration was reduced (P < 0.05) in the BP fed groups and 
there was an interaction (P < 0.05). Estimation of CH4 production in the rumen
was remarkably reduced by the R:C ratio with BP supplementation (P < 0.01).
Furthermore, apparent digestibilities of DM, OM, CP, NDF, and ADF were
significantly increased in the R:C ratio 30:70 (P < 0.01). Nitrogen absorption
and nitrogen retention were also significantly altered by R:C at 30:70 (P < 0.01)
and nitrogen absorption was an interaction (P < 0.01). Based on this study, it
could be concluded that supplementation of BP resulted in improvement of ruminal 
pH, enhanced C3, and reduced CH4 production. Thus, BP could be a dietary rumen
enhancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-019-02163-y 
PMID: 31836953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

