
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 Feb 28;30(2):216-225. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1907.07057.

Characterization of Novel Salt-Tolerant Esterase Isolated from the Marine
Bacterium Alteromonas sp. 39-G1.

Won SJ(1), Jeong HB(1), Kim HK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, The Catholic University of Korea, Bucheon 14662, 
Republic of Korea.

An esterase gene, estA1, was cloned from Alteromonas sp. 39-G1 isolated from the 
Beaufort Sea. The gene is composed of 1,140 nucleotides and codes for a 41,190 Da
protein containing 379 amino acids. As a result of a BLAST search, the protein
sequence of esterase EstA1 was found to be identical to Alteromonas sp. esterase 
(GenBank: PHS53692). As far as we know, no research on this enzyme has yet been
conducted. Phylogenetic analysis showed that esterase EstA1 was a member of the
bacterial lipolytic enzyme family IV (hormone sensitive lipases). Two deletion
mutants (Δ20 and Δ54) of the esterase EstA1 were produced in Escherichia coli
BL21 (DE3) cells with part of the N-terminal of the protein removed and His-tag
attached to the C-terminal. These enzymes exhibited the highest activity toward
p-nitrophenyl (pNP) acetate (C2) and had little or no activity towards pNP-esters
with acyl chains longer than C6. Their optimum temperature and pH of the
catalytic activity were 45°C and pH 8.0, respectively. As the NaCl concentration 
increased, their enzyme activities continued to increase and the highest enzyme
activities were measured in 5 M NaCl. These enzymes were found to be stable for
up to 8 h in the concentration of 3-5 M NaCl. Moreover, they have been found to
be stable for various metal ions, detergents and organic solvents. These
salt-tolerant and chemical-resistant properties suggest that the enzyme esterase 
EstA1 is both academically and industrially useful.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1907.07057 
PMID: 31838795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

