
1. Med Mal Infect. 2020 Jun;50(4):342-345. doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2019.11.008. Epub
2019 Dec 14.

Example of antimicrobial stewardship program in a community hospital in Italy.

Bolla C(1), Di Pietrantonj C(2), Ferrando E(3), Pernecco A(4), Salerno A(5),
D'Orsi M(6), Chichino G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious diseases division, ASO AL, Alessandria, Italy. Electronic address: 
cesare.bolla@libero.it.
(2)Ssepi - Seremi ASL AL, Alessandria, Italy. Electronic address:
cdipietrantonj@aslal.it.
(3)Infection control nurse ASL AL, Alessandria, Italy. Electronic address:
elferrando@aslal.it.
(4)Infection control nurse ASL AL, Alessandria, Italy. Electronic address:
apernecco@aslal.it.
(5)Clinical microbiology unit ASL AL, Alessandria, Italy. Electronic address:
asalerno@aslal.it.
(6)Pharmacy department ASL AL, Alessandria, Italy. Electronic address:
mdorsi@aslal.it.
(7)Infectious diseases division, ASO AL, Alessandria, Italy. Electronic address: 
guido.chichino@ospedale.al.it.

BACKGROUND: Inappropriate use of antibiotics has caused the emergence of
resistant strains of bacteria. The hospital of Alessandria, Italy, implemented an
antimicrobial stewardship (AS) pilot program between 2013 and 2015 in the
intensive care units (ICUs) and internal medicine departments of Casale
Monferrato and Tortona. We aimed to describe the project, results at the end of
the intervention, and its strengths and weaknesses.
METHODS: The protocol, designed by the local infection control committee,
included three consecutive steps: local guidelines for empirical antibiotic
therapy and list of prescription antibiotics with justification, monitoring of
antibiotic consumption and antimicrobial resistance trend, and peer-to-peer audit
sessions in the wards.
RESULTS: One thousand and eighty-five observations were made, corresponding to
850 patients admitted to the ICUs (16.7%) and internal medicine departments
(83.3%). Appropriate antibiotic prescriptions increased by 6.4% between 2013 and 
2015. The greatest improvement in appropriate prescriptions was observed for
glycopeptides and fluoroquinolones (+17.4% and +16.2%, respectively). We reported
305 inappropriate prescriptions, with the most frequent errors being absence of
an infectious process (33.3%), inadequate combination therapy (12.8%), and
absence of microbiological investigations (8.5%). A reduced incidence of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcusaureus (MRSA) was also observed (p<0.0037).
CONCLUSIONS: Antimicrobial stewardship programs contribute to improving
antibiotic prescription and can be implemented in small community hospitals.
Narrower interventions, focused on a single disease or single antibiotic should
be encouraged.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medmal.2019.11.008 
PMID: 31848106 

