
1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2020 May;28(5):627-635. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0559-2. Epub
2019 Dec 16.

SweHLA: the high confidence HLA typing bio-resource drawn from 1000 Swedish
genomes.

Nordin J(1), Ameur A(2), Lindblad-Toh K(3)(4), Gyllensten U(2), Meadows JRS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. jessika.nordin@imbim.uu.se.
(2)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.

There is a need to accurately call human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes from
existing short-read sequencing data, however there is no single solution that
matches the gold standard of Sanger sequenced lab typing. Here we aimed to
combine results from available software programs, minimizing the biases of
applied algorithm and HLA reference. The result is a robust HLA population
resource for the published 1000 Swedish genomes, and a framework for future HLA
interrogation. HLA 2nd-field alleles were called using four imputation and
inference methods for the classical eight genes (class I: HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C;
class II: HLA-DPA1, HLA-DPB1, HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, HLA-DRB1). A high confidence
population set (SweHLA) was determined using an n-1 concordance rule for class I 
(four software) and class II (three software) alleles. Results were compared
across populations and individual programs benchmarked to SweHLA. Per gene, 875
to 988 of the 1000 samples were genotyped in SweHLA; 920 samples had at least
seven loci called. While a small fraction of reference alleles were common to all
software (class I = 1.9% and class II = 4.1%), this did not affect the overall
call rate. Gene-level concordance was high compared to European populations
(>0.83%), with COX and PGF the dominant SweHLA haplotypes. We noted that 15/18
discordant alleles (delta allele frequency >2) were previously reported as
disease-associated. These differences could in part explain across-study genetic 
replication failures, reinforcing the need to use multiple software solutions.
SweHLA demonstrates a way to use existing NGS data to generate a population
resource agnostic to individual HLA software biases.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-019-0559-2 
PMCID: PMC7170882
PMID: 31844174 

