
1. J Mol Biol. 2020 Feb 14;432(4):765-785. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.12.003. Epub 2019
Dec 17.

Good Gone Bad: One Toxin Away From Disease for Bacteroides fragilis.

Valguarnera E(1), Wardenburg JB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S.
Euclid Ave. Box 8208, St. Louis, MO 63110.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S.
Euclid Ave. Box 8208, St. Louis, MO 63110. Electronic address: jbubeck@wustl.edu.

The human gut is colonized by hundreds of trillions of microorganisms whose
acquisition begins during early infancy. Species from the Bacteroides genus are
ubiquitous commensals, comprising about thirty percent of the human gut
microbiota. Bacteroides fragilis is one of the least abundant Bacteroides
species, yet is the most common anaerobe isolated from extraintestinal infections
in humans. A subset of B. fragilis strains carry a genetic element that encodes a
metalloprotease enterotoxin named Bacteroides fragilis toxin, or BFT.
Toxin-bearing strains, or Enterotoxigenic B. fragilis (ETBF) cause acute and
chronic intestinal disease in children and adults. Despite this association with 
disease, around twenty percent of the human population appear to be asymptomatic 
carriers of ETBF. BFT damages the colonic epithelial barrier by inducing cleavage
of the zonula adherens protein E-cadherin and initiating a cell signaling
response characterized by inflammation and c-Myc-dependent pro-oncogenic
hyperproliferation. As a consequence, mice harboring genetic mutations that
predispose to colonic inflammation or tumor formation are uniquely susceptible to
toxin-mediated injury. The recent observation of ETBF-bearing biofilms in colon
biopsies from humans with colon cancer susceptibility loci strongly suggests that
ETBF is a driver of colorectal cancer. This article will address ETBF biology
from a host-pathobiont perspective, including clinical data, analysis of
molecular mechanisms of disease, and the complex ecological context of the human 
gut.

Copyright Â© 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.12.003 
PMID: 31857085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

