
1. J Pept Sci. 2019 Dec;25(12):e3220. doi: 10.1002/psc.3220.

Antimicrobial peptide PMAP-37 analogs: Increasing the positive charge to enhance 
the antibacterial activity of PMAP-37.

Zhou J(1), Chen L(1), Liu Y(1), Shen T(1), Zhang C(1), Liu Z(1), Feng X(2), Wang 
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Henan University of Science and
Technology, Luoyang, Henan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Microbiology of China's Ministry of Agriculture,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

Bacterial resistance induced by the use of antibiotics has provided a chance for 
the development of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), and modification of AMPs to
enhance the antibacterial activity or stability has become a research focus.
PMAP-37 is an AMP isolated from porcine myeloid marrow, and studies on its
modification have not yet been reported. In this study, three PMAP-37 analogs
named PMAP-37(F9-R), PMAP-37(F34-R), and PMAP-37(F9/34-R) were designed by
residue substitution to enhance the positive charge. The antimicrobial activity
of PMAP-37 and its analogs in vitro and in vivo were detected. The results showed
that compared with PMAP-37, PMAP-37(F9-R) and PMAP-37(F9/34-R) exhibited
antibacterial activity against S. flexneri CICC21534. Although PMAP-37(F34-R) had
no antibacterial activity against S. flexneri CICC21534, its minimal inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) were significantly lower than those of PMAP-37 against most
bacterial strains. Besides, all PMAP-37 analogs were pH stable, retaining stable 
antibacterial activity after treatment with solution from pH 2 to pH 8/9. In
addition, the PMAP-37 analogs displayed increased thermal stability, and
PMAP-37(F34-R) retained >60% antibacterial activity after boiling for 2 hours.
Furthermore, the PMAP-37 analogs exhibited impressive therapeutic efficacy in
bacterial infections by reducing bacterial burden and inflammatory damage in the 
lung and liver, resulting in a reduction in mortality. Notably, the therapeutic
effect of PMAP-37(F34-R) was comparable to that of ceftiofur sodium, and even
superior to antibiotics in L. monocytogenes CICC21533 infection model. In
conclusion, the PMAP-37(F34-R) may be a candidate for the treatment of bacterial 
infections in the clinic.

Â© 2019 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/psc.3220 
PMID: 31858653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

