
1. Chemosphere. 2020 Apr;245:125603. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.125603. Epub
2019 Dec 11.

Metagenomic insights into microbial arsenic metabolism in shallow groundwater of 
Datong basin, China.

Wang L(1), Yin Z(1), Jing C(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research
Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
100085, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research
Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
100085, China. Electronic address: cyjing@rcees.ac.cn.

Elevated arsenic (As) in groundwater is an urgent environmental problem that has 
caused serious endemic diseases in Datong basin, China. The fate and toxicity of 
As are generally regulated by microbial As metabolic processes. However, little
is known about the microbial community and As metabolism in Datong basin. Herein,
the microbial community structure and As metabolism genes in four wells with
different levels of As concentration in Shanyin county were investigated using
metagenomics approach. The results showed that the presence of As influenced the 
microbial communities, and Rhodococcus genus was significantly enriched in
elevated As wells. As resistance genes were dominant from low to high As
containing wells, and As efflux genes such as arsB and acr3 were positively
correlated with As concentrations, suggesting that microbes tend to pump As out
of the cell as a strategy for As detoxification. Other environmental factors
including oxidation-reduction potential (ORP), total organic carbon (TOC),
sulfate, and temperature also played a role in shaping the microbial community
structure and As metabolic processes.

Copyright Â© 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.125603 
PMID: 31855753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

