
1. Exp Hematol. 2020 Jan;81:1-15.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2019.12.003. Epub 2019
Dec 18.

CD34 and EPCR coordinately enrich functional murine hematopoietic stem cells
under normal and inflammatory conditions.

Rabe JL(1), Hernandez G(1), Chavez JS(1), Mills TS(1), Nerlov C(2), Pietras
EM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)MRC Molecular Hematology Unit, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Hematology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, Colorado, USA; Department of Immunology & Microbiology, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA. Electronic address:
eric.pietras@CUAnschutz.edu.

Hematopoiesis is dynamically regulated to maintain blood system function under
nonhomeostatic conditions such as inflammation and injury. However, common
surface marker and hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) reporter systems used for
prospective enrichment of HSCs have been less rigorously tested in these
contexts. Here, we use two surface markers, EPCR/CD201 and CD34, to re-analyze
dynamic changes in the HSC-enriched phenotypic SLAM compartment in a mouse model 
of chronic interleukin (IL)-1 exposure. EPCR and CD34 coordinately identify four 
functionally and molecularly distinct compartments within the SLAM fraction,
including an EPCR+/CD34- fraction whose long-term serial repopulating activity is
only modestly impacted by chronic IL-1 exposure, relative to unfractionated SLAM 
cells. Notably, the other three fractions expand in frequency following IL-1
treatment and represent actively proliferating, lineage-primed cell states with
limited long-term repopulating potential. Importantly, we find that the
Fgd5-ZSGreen HSC reporter mouse enriches for molecularly and functionally intact 
HSCs regardless of IL-1 exposure. Together, our findings provide further evidence
of dynamic heterogeneity within a commonly used HSC-enriched phenotypic
compartment under stress conditions. Importantly, they also indicate that
stringency of prospective isolation approaches can enhance interpretation of
findings related to HSC function when studying models of hematopoietic stress.

Copyright Â© 2019 ISEH -- Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exphem.2019.12.003 
PMCID: PMC6938677
PMID: 31863798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest disclosure The authors
declare no competing interests.

