
1. JAMA. 2019 Dec 24;322(24):2399-2410. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.18800.

Invasive Nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae Infection Among Adults With HIV in
Metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia, 2008-2018.

Collins LF(1)(2), Havers FP(3)(4), Tunali A(1)(2), Thomas S(1)(2), Clennon JA(5),
Wiley Z(1), Tobin-D'Angelo M(2)(6), Parrott T(2)(6), Read TD(1)(2), Satola
SW(1)(2), Petit RA 3rd(1)(2), Farley MM(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)Georgia Emerging Infections Program, Atlanta.
(3)Division of Bacterial Diseases, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia.
(4)Atlanta VA Medical Center, Decatur, Georgia.
(5)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins School of Public
Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(6)Georgia Department of Public Health, Atlanta.

Importance: Invasive nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) infection among
adults is typically associated with bacteremic pneumonia. Nontypeable H
influenzae is genetically diverse and clusters of infection are uncommon.
Objective: To evaluate an increase in invasive NTHi infection from 2017-2018
among HIV-infected men who have sex with men in metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia.
Design, Setting, and Participants: A population-based surveillance study with a
cohort substudy and descriptive epidemiological analysis identified adults aged
18 years or older with invasive NTHi infection (isolation of NTHi from a normally
sterile site) between January 1, 2008, and December 31, 2018 (final date of
follow-up).
Exposures: Time period, HIV status, and genetic relatedness (ie, cluster status) 
of available NTHi isolates.
Main Outcomes and Measures: The primary outcome was incidence of invasive NTHi
infection (from 2008-2016 and 2017-2018) among persons with HIV and compared with
NTHi infection from 2008-2018 among those without HIV. The secondary outcomes
were assessed among those aged 18 to 55 years with invasive NTHi infection and
included epidemiological, clinical, and geographic comparisons by cluster status.
Results: Among 553 adults with invasive NTHi infection (median age, 66 years
[Q1-Q3, 48-78 years]; 52% male; and 38% black), 60 cases occurred among persons
with HIV. Incidence of invasive NTHi infection from 2017-2018 among persons with 
HIV (41.7 cases per 100 000) was significantly greater than from 2008-2016 among 
those with HIV (9.6 per 100 000; P < .001) and from 2008-2018 among those without
HIV (1.1 per 100 000; P < .001). Among adults aged 18 to 55 years with invasive
NTHi infections from 2017-2018 (n = 179), persons with HIV (n = 31) were
significantly more likely than those from 2008-2018 without HIV (n = 124) to be
male (94% vs 49%, respectively; P < .001), black (100% vs 53%; P < .001), and
have septic arthritis (35% vs 1%; P < .001). Persons with HIV who had invasive
NTHi infection from 2017-2018 (n = 31) were more likely than persons with HIV who
had invasive NTHi infection from 2008-2016 (n = 24) to have septic arthritis (35%
vs 4%, respectively; P = .01). Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis of 174 of 179
NTHi isolates from 18- to 55-year-olds identified 2 genetically distinct clonal
groups: cluster 1 (C1; n = 24) and cluster 2 (C2; n = 23). Whole-genome
sequencing confirmed 2 clonal lineages of NTHi infection and revealed all C1
isolates (but none of the C2 isolates) carried IS1016 (an insertion sequence
associated with H influenzae capsule genes). Persons with HIV were significantly 
more likely to have C1 or C2 invasive NTHi infection from 2017-2018 (28/31 [90%])
compared with from 2008-2016 among persons with HIV (10/24 [42%]; P < .001) and
compared with from 2008-2018 among those without HIV (9/119 [8%]; P < .001).
Among persons with C1 or C2 invasive NTHi infection who had HIV (n = 38) (median 
age, 34.5 years; 100% male; 100% black; 82% men who have sex with men), 32 (84%) 
lived in 2 urban counties and an area of significant spatial aggregation was
identified compared with those without C1 or C2 invasive NTHi infection.
Conclusions and Relevance: Among persons with HIV in Atlanta, the incidence of
invasive nontypeable H influenzae infection increased significantly from
2017-2018 compared with 2008-2016. Two unique but genetically related clonal
strains were identified and were associated with septic arthritis among black men
who have sex with men and who lived in geographic proximity.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2019.18800 
PMCID: PMC6990662
PMID: 31860046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

