
1. Molecules. 2019 Dec 19;25(1). pii: E22. doi: 10.3390/molecules25010022.

Muraymycin Nucleoside Antibiotics: Structure-Activity Relationship for Variations
in the Nucleoside Unit.

Heib A, Niro G, Weck SC(1), Koppermann S(1), Ducho C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Saarland
University, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbr√ºcken, Germany.

Muraymycins are a subclass of naturally occurring nucleoside antibiotics with
promising antibacterial activity. They inhibit the bacterial enzyme translocase I
(MraY), a clinically yet unexploited target mediating an essential intracellular 
step of bacterial peptidoglycan biosynthesis. Several structurally simplified
muraymycin analogues have already been synthesized for structure-activity
relationship (SAR) studies. We now report on novel derivatives with unprecedented
variations in the nucleoside unit. For the synthesis of these new muraymycin
analogues, we employed a bipartite approach facilitating the introduction of
different nucleosyl amino acid motifs. This also included thymidine- and
5-fluorouridine-derived nucleoside core structures. Using an in vitro assay for
MraY activity, it was found that the introduction of substituents in the
5-position of the pyrimidine nucleobase led to a significant loss of inhibitory
activity towards MraY. The loss of nucleobase aromaticity (by reduction of the
uracil C5-C6 double bond) resulted in a ca. tenfold decrease in inhibitory
potency. In contrast, removal of the 2'-hydroxy group furnished retained
activity, thus demonstrating that modifications of the ribose moiety might be
well-tolerated. Overall, these new SAR insights will guide the future design of
novel muraymycin analogues for their potential development towards antibacterial 
drug candidates.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25010022 
PMCID: PMC6983020
PMID: 31861655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

