
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2020 Feb;79:106109. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2019.106109. Epub 
2019 Dec 19.

Asiaticoside nitric oxide gel accelerates diabetic cutaneous ulcers healing by
activating Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway.

Nie X(1), Zhang H(2), Shi X(2), Zhao J(2), Chen Y(2), Wu F(2), Yang J(3), Li
X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Materia Medica, College of Pharmacy, Army Medical University
(Third Military Medical University), Chongqing 400038, China; College of
Pharmacy, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi 563000, China; Key Laboratory of Basic 
Pharmacology of Ministry of Education and Joint International Research Laboratory
of Ethnomedicine of Ministry of Education, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi
563000, China. Electronic address: niexuqiang@zmu.edu.cn.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi 563000, China.
(3)Pharmacy Department, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi
563003, China.
(4)Institute of Materia Medica, College of Pharmacy, Army Medical University
(Third Military Medical University), Chongqing 400038, China. Electronic address:
lpsh008@aliyun.com.

Diabetic ulcers, gangrene, local infections and other traumatic symptoms of wound
healing are all directly related. Promoting the early healing of diabetic
cutaneous ulcers (DCU) and reducing the disability and treatment costs is an
important research project integrating traditional Chinese and Western medicine. 
Nitric oxide (NO) is a key component of wound healing, and endogenous NO
secretion is insufficient during the development of DCU. It has been reported
that exogenous NO can promote wound healing, but exogenous NO has a short
half-life and is difficult to adhere to the skin. Asiaticoside (AC) is extracted 
from the traditional Chinese medicine Centella asiatica, and has angiogenic,
anticancer, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and wound-healing effects. Therefore,
our study is based on the hypothesis that the combination of AC and NO to treat
DCU is possible. In this study we considered gels of AC and NO, and evaluated the
effects of the gel on DCU healing. Based on our study, it was found that the
combined effect of asiaticoside and NO could accelerate the healing rate of DCU
wounds. The asiaticoside NO gel can inhibit the growth of bacteria in the wound
surface, alleviate the inflammatory reaction of wound, and increase the
expression of VEGF, iNOS, eNOS and CD34. Our research shows that asiaticoside NO 
gel may promote DCU wound healing by regulating Wnt/β-Catenin signaling pathway. 
It will provide new targets and strategies for the diagnosis and treatment of
DCU.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2019.106109 
PMID: 31865242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the
content and writing of this article.

