
1. Res Rep Health Eff Inst. 2019 Mar;(198):1-54.

Understanding the Early Biological Effects of Isoprene-Derived Particulate Matter
Enhanced by Anthropogenic Pollutants.

Surratt JD(1), Lin YH(1), Arashiro M(1), Vizuete WG(1), Zhang Z(1), Gold A(1),
Jaspers I(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Fry RC(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Gillings School of
Global Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
(2)Center for Environmental Medicine, Asthma, and Lung Biology, School of
Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
(3)Curriculum in Toxicology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

INTRODUCTION: Airborne fine particulate matter (PM2.5; particulate matter ≤ 2.5
μm in aerodynamic diameter) plays a key role in air quality, climate, and public 
health. Globally, the largest mass fraction of PM2.5 is organic, dominated by
secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formed from atmospheric oxidation of volatile
organic compounds (VOCs). Isoprene from vegetation is the most abundant
nonmethane VOC emitted into Earth's atmosphere. Isoprene has been recently
recognized as one of the major sources of global SOA production that is enhanced 
by the presence of anthropogenic pollutants, such as acidic sulfate derived from 
sulfur dioxide (SO2), through multiphase chemistry of its oxidation products.
Considering the abundance of isoprene-derived SOA in the atmosphere,
understanding mechanisms of adverse health effects through inhalation exposure is
critical to mitigating its potential impact on public health. Although previous
studies have examined the toxicological effects of certain isoprene-derived
gas-phase oxidation products, to date, no systematic studies have examined the
potential toxicological effects of isoprene-derived SOA, its constituents, or its
SOA precursors on human lung cells.
SPECIFIC AIMS: The overall objective of this study was to investigate the early
biological effects of isoprene-derived SOA and its subtypes on BEAS-2B cells (a
human bronchial epithelial cell line), with a particular focus on the alteration 
of oxidative stress- and inflammation-related genes. To achieve this objective,
there were two specific aims.
1. Examine toxicity and early biological effects of SOA derived from the
photochemical oxidation of isoprene, considering both urban and downwind-urban
types of chemistry.2. Examine toxicity and early biological effects of SOA
derived directly from downstream oxidation products of isoprene (i.e., epoxides
and hydroperoxides).METHODS: Isoprene-derived SOA was first generated by
photooxidation of isoprene under natural sunlight in the presence of nitric oxide
(NO) and acidified sulfate aerosols. Experiments were conducted in a 120-m3
outdoor Teflon-film chamber located on the roof of the Gillings School of Global 
Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-Chapel Hill).
BEAS-2B cells were exposed to chamber- generated isoprene-derived SOA using the
Electrostatic Aerosol in Vitro Exposure System (EAVES). This approach allowed us 
to generate atmospherically relevant compositions of isoprene-derived SOA and to 
examine its toxicity through in vitro exposures at an air-liquid interface,
providing a more biologically relevant exposure model. Isoprene-derived SOA
samples were also collected, concurrently with EAVES sampling, onto Teflon
membrane filters for in vitro resuspension exposures and for analysis of aerosol 
chemical composition by gas chromatography/electron ionization-quadrupole mass
spectrometry (GC/EI-MS) with prior trimethylsilylation and ultra-performance
liquid-chromatography coupled to high-resolution quadrupole time-of-flight mass
spectrometry equipped with electrospray ionization (UPLC/ESI-HR-QTOFMS).
Isoprene-derived SOA samples were also analyzed by the dithiothreitol (DTT) assay
in order to characterize their reactive oxygen species (ROS)-generation
potential.
Organic synthesis of known isoprene-derived SOA precursors, which included
isoprene epoxydiols (IEPOX), methacrylic acid epoxide (MAE), and isoprene-derived
hydroxyhydroperoxides (ISOPOOH), was conducted in order to isolate major
isoprene-derived SOA formation pathways from each other and to determine which of
these pathways (or SOA types) is potentially more toxic. Since IEPOX and MAE
produce SOA through multiphase chemistry onto acidic sulfate aerosol, dark
reactive uptake experiments of IEPOX and MAE in the presence of acidic sulfate
aerosol were performed in a 10-m3 flexible Teflon indoor chamber at UNC-Chapel
Hill. Since the generation of SOA from ISOPOOH (through a non-IEPOX route)
requires a hydroxyl radical (•OH)-initiated oxidation, ozonolysis of
tetramethylethylene (TME) was used to form the needed •OH radicals in the indoor 
chamber. The resultant low-volatility multifunctional hydroperoxides condensed
onto nonacidified sulfate aerosol, yielding the ISOPOOH-derived SOA needed for
exposures. Similar to the outdoor chamber SOAs, IEPOX, MAE- and ISOPOOH-derived
SOAs were collected onto Teflon membrane filters and were subsequently chemically
characterized by GC/EI-MS and UPLC/ESI-HR-QTOFMS as well as for ROS-generation
potential using the DTT assay. These filters were also used for resuspension in
vitro exposures.By conducting gene expression profiling, we provided mechanistic 
insights into the potential health effects of isoprene-derived SOA. First, gene
expression profiling of 84 oxidative stress- and 249 inflammation-associated
human genes was performed for cells exposed to isoprene-derived SOA generated in 
our outdoor chamber experiments in EAVES or by resuspension. Two pathway-focused 
panels were utilized for this purpose: (1) nCounter GX Human Inflammation Kit
comprised of 249 human genes (NanoString), and (2) Human Oxidative Stress Plus
RT2 Profiler PCR Array (Qiagen) comprised of 84 oxidative stress-associated
genes. We compared the gene expression levels in cells exposed to SOA generated
in an outdoor chamber from photochemical oxidation of isoprene in the presence of
NO and acidified sulfate seed aerosol to cells exposed to a dark control mixture 
of isoprene, NO, and acidified sulfate seed aerosol to isolate the effects of the
isoprene-derived SOA on the cells using the EAVES and resuspension exposure
methods. Pathway-based analysis was performed for significantly altered genes
using the ConsensusPathDB database, which is a database system for the
integration of human gene functional interactions to provide biological pathway
information for a gene set of interest. Pathway annotation was performed to
provide biological pathway information for each gene set. The gene-gene
interaction networks were constructed and visualized using the GeneMANIA
Cytoscape app (version 3.4.1) to predict the putative function of altered genes. 
Lastly, isoprene-derived SOA collected onto filters was used in resuspension
exposures to measure select inflammatory biomarkers, including interleukin 8
(IL-8) and prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2) genes, in BEAS-2B cells 
to ensure that effects observed from EAVES exposures were attributable to
particle-phase organic products. Since EAVES and resuspension exposures compared 
well, gene expression profiling for IEPOX-, MAE- and ISOPOOH-derived SOA were
conducted using only resuspension exposures.RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Chemical
characterization coupled with biological analyses show that atmospherically
relevant compositions of isoprene-derived SOA alter the levels of 41 oxidative
stress-related genes. Of the different composition types of isoprene-derived SOA,
MAE- and ISOPOOH-derived SOA altered the greatest number of genes, suggesting
that carbonyl and hydroperoxide functional groups are oxidative stress promoters.
Taken together, the different composition types accounted for 34 of the genes
altered by the total isoprene-derived SOA mixture, while 7 remained unique to the
total mixture exposures, indicating that there is either a synergistic effect of 
the different isoprene-derived SOA components or an unaccounted component in the 
mixture.
The high-oxides of nitrogen (NOx) regime, which yielded MAE- and methacrolein
(MACR)-derived SOA, had a higher ROS-generation potential (as measured by the DTT
assay) than the low- NOx regime, which included IEPOX- and isoprene-derived SOA. 
However, ISOPOOH-derived SOA, which also formed in the low- NOx regime, had the
highest ROS-generation potential, similar to 1,4-naphthoquinone (1,4-NQ). This
suggests that aerosol-phase organic peroxides contribute significantly to
particulate matter (PM) oxidative potential. MAE- and MACR- derived SOA showed
equal or greater ROS-generation potential than was reported in prior UNC-Chapel
Hill studies on diesel exhaust PM, highlighting the importance of a comprehensive
investigation of the toxicity of isoprene-derived SOA. Notably, ISOPOOH-derived
SOA was one order of magnitude higher in ROS-generation potential than diesel
exhaust particles previously examined at UNC-Chapel Hill. As an acellular assay, 
the DTT assay may not be predictive of oxidative stress; therefore, we also
focused on the gene expression results from the cellular exposures.We have
demonstrated that the nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) and the 
redox-sensitive activation protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor networks have
been significantly altered upon exposure to isoprene-derived SOA. The
identification of Nrf2 pathway in cells exposed to isoprene-derived SOA is in
accordance with our findings using the DTT assay, which measures the thiol
reactivity of PM samples as a surrogate for their ROS-generation potential.
Specifically, our results point to the cysteine-thiol modifications within cells 
that lead to activation of Nrf2-related gene expression.However, based on our
gene expression results showing no clear relationship between DTT activity and
the number of altered oxidative stress-related genes, the DTT activity of
isoprene-derived SOA may not be directly indicative of toxicity relative to other
SOA types. While activation of Nrf2-associated genes has been identified with
responses to oxidative stress and linked to traffic related air pollution
exposure in both toxicological and epidemiological studies, their implicit
involvement in this study suggests that activation of Nrf2-related gene
expression may occur with exposures to all sorts of PM types.By controlling the
exposure time, method, and dose we demonstrated that among the SOA derived from
previously identified individual precursors of isoprene-derived SOA,
ISOPOOH-derived SOA alters more oxidative stress related genes than does
IEPOX-derived SOA, but fewer than MAE-derived SOA. This suggests that the
composition of MAE-derived SOA may be the greatest contributor to alterations of 
oxidative stress-related gene expression observed due to isoprene-derived SOA
exposure. Further study on induced levels of protein expression and specific
toxicological endpoints is necessary to determine if the observed gene expression
changes lead to adverse health effects. In addition, such studies have
implications for pollution-control strategies because NOx and SO2 are
controllable pollutants that can alter the composition of SOA, and in turn alter 
its effects on gene expression. The mass fraction of different components of
atmospheric isoprene derived SOA should be considered, but altering the fraction 
of high- NOx isoprene-derived SOA (e.g., MAE derived SOA) may yield greater
changes in gene expression than altering the fraction of low- NOx isoprene
derived SOA types (ISOPOOH- or IEPOX-derived SOA). Finally, this study confirms
that total isoprene-derived SOA alters the expression of a greater number of
genes than does SOA derived from the tested precursors. This warrants further
work to determine the underlying explanation for this observation, which may be
uncharacterized components of isoprene-derived SOA or the potential for synergism
between the studied components.

© 2019 Health Effects Institute. All rights reserved.


PMID: 31872748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

