
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Dec 26;17(1). pii: E181. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17010181.

The Effect of Climate Change and the Snail-Schistosome Cycle in Transmission and 
Bio-Control of Schistosomiasis in Sub-Saharan Africa.

Adekiya TA(1), Aruleba RT(1), Oyinloye BE(1)(2), Okosun KO(3), Kappo AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biology Group, Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Afe Babalola University, PMB 5454, Ado-Ekiti
360001, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Vaal University of Technology, Vanderbijlpark 1900,
South Africa.

In the next century, global warming, due to changes in climatic factors, is
expected to have an enormous influence on the interactions between pathogens and 
their hosts. Over the years, the rate at which vector-borne diseases and their
transmission dynamics modify and develop has been shown to be highly dependent to
a certain extent on changes in temperature and geographical distribution.
Schistosomiasis has been recognized as a tropical and neglected vector-borne
disease whose rate of infection has been predicted to be elevated worldwide,
especially in sub-Saharan Africa; the region currently with the highest
proportion of people at risk, due to changes in climate. This review not only
suggests the need to develop an efficient and effective model that will predict
Schistosoma spp. population dynamics but seeks to evaluate the effectiveness of
several current control strategies. The design of a framework model to predict
and accommodate the future incidence of schistosomiasis in human population
dynamics in sub-Saharan Africa is proposed. The impact of climate change on
schistosomiasis transmission as well as the distribution of several freshwater
snails responsible for the transmission of Schistosoma parasites in the region is
also reviewed. Lastly, this article advocates for modelling several control
mechanisms for schistosomiasis in sub-Saharan Africa so as to tackle the
re-infection of the disease, even after treating infected people with
praziquantel, the first-line treatment drug for schistosomiasis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17010181 
PMCID: PMC6981654
PMID: 31887979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

