
1. Immunobiology. 2020 Mar;225(2):151899. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2019.151899. Epub
2019 Dec 17.

Mechanistic basis of co-stimulatory CD40-CD40L ligation mediated regulation of
immune responses in cancer and autoimmune disorders.

Chand Dakal T(1), Dhabhai B(2), Agarwal D(3), Gupta R(3), Nagda G(4), Meena
AR(4), Dhakar R(2), Menon A(2), Mathur R(3), Mona(5), Yadav V(6), Sharma A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Genome & Computational Biology Lab, Department of Biotechnology, Mohanlal
Sukhadia University, Udaipur, Rajasthan 313001, India. Electronic address:
tc.dakal@mlsu.ac.in.
(2)Genome & Computational Biology Lab, Department of Biotechnology, Mohanlal
Sukhadia University, Udaipur, Rajasthan 313001, India.
(3)Department of Biosciences, Manipal University Jaipur, Jaipur, Rajasthan
303007, India.
(4)Department of Zoology, Mohanlal Sukhadia University, Udaipur, Rajasthan
313001, India.
(5)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Central University of Haryana, Jant-Pali,
Mahendergarh, Haryana 123029, India.
(7)Department of Neurology, University Clinic Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Department of 
Ophthalmology, University Clinic Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Generation of an accurate humoral and a cell mediated adaptive immune
responsesare dictated by binding of an antigen to a T- and a B-cell receptor,
respectively (first signal) followed by ligation of costimulatory molecules
(second signal). CD40, a costimulatory receptor molecule, expressed mainly on
antigen presenting cells, some non-immune cells and tumors, binds to CD40 ligand 
molecule expressed transiently on T-cells and non-immune cells under inflammatory
conditions. In the past decade, the CD40-CD40L interaction has emerged as an
immune-potentiating system that governs and regulates host immune response
against various diseases and pathogens, failing of which results in detrimental
patho-physiologies including cancer and autoimmune disorders. CD40-CD40L
transduces immune signals intracellularly via TRAF-dependent and independent
mechanisms and further downstream by different MAPK pathways and transcription
factors such as NF-κB, p38 etc. While CD40 signaling pathway through its cognate 
interaction between B and T cells promotes activation and proliferation of
B-cells, Ig class switching, and generation of B cell memory; however, CD40-CD40L
interaction involving other APCs and non-immune cells relay distinct cell
signaling resulting in production of a variety of cytokines/chemokines and cell
adhesion molecules ultimately conferring host defense against pathogen. In cancer
and autoimmune disorders, CD40-CD40L interaction is also responsible for aberrant
expression of many disease specific markers, class I/II MHC molecules and other
co-stimulatory molecules such as B7 and CD28 in cell- and disease-specific
manner. In the present review, the current state of understanding about the
CD40-CD40L mediated regulation of immune and non-immune cells is presented. The
current paradigm is to target CD40 using agonist anti-CD40 mAbs alone or in
synergistic combination with chemotherapy in order to harness or confer
anti-tumor and anti-inflammatory immunity.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2019.151899 
PMID: 31899051 

