
1. Food Sci Nutr. 2019 Nov 7;7(12):3941-3949. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.1255. eCollection
2019 Dec.

Salt-tolerant Staphylococcus bacteria induce structural and nutritional
alterations of salted duck egg white.

Xiao G(1), Chen Y(1), Fang R(1), Xiao C(2), Yuan H(1), Chu B(1), Liu X(1), Gong
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Lab for Biological and Chemical Processing
Technologies of Farm Products School of Biological and Chemical Engineering
Zhejiang University of Science and Technology Hangzhou China.
(2)Institute of Food Science Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences Hangzhou
China.

Salted duck egg white, a major by-product of salted egg yolk production, is rich 
in nutrients. However, its high salinity limits its application in the food
industry. In the present study, three haloduric bacterium strains (C1, C2, and
C3) were isolated from Jinhua ham, and strain C1 exhibited higher ratio of the
transparent circle diameter to the colony diameter (HC) and gelatin liquefaction.
Strain C1 was further identified as a member of the genus Staphylococcus through 
gene sequencing and EzTaxon-e analyses. Salted duck egg white was fermented by
strain C1, and the thermal stability, microstructure, amino acid composition, and
γ-aminobutyric acid of the egg white were compared with egg white without
fermentation. The fermented salted duck egg white had a significantly low
salinity. Meanwhile, it increased its thermal stability compared with the control
through losing an endotherm at around 85°C and forming a new endotherm peak
starting at 91.8°C. Additionally, free amino acids and γ-aminobutyric acid were
found only in the fermented salted duck egg white. These indicated that
fermentation with salt-resistant strains could alter the structure of salted duck
egg white and improve its nutritional quality.

© 2019 The Authors. Food Science & Nutrition published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.1255 
PMCID: PMC6924318
PMID: 31890172 

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared that they have no conflict
of interest.

