
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Apr;79:104167. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.104167. Epub
2019 Dec 28.

Unique constellations of five polymorphic sites of Helicobacter pylori vacA and
cagA status associated with risk of gastric cancer.

Bakhti SZ(1), Latifi-Navid S(2), Zahri S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Mohaghegh Ardabili, 
Ardabil 56199-11367, Iran.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Mohaghegh Ardabili, 
Ardabil 56199-11367, Iran. Electronic address: s_latifi@uma.ac.ir.

Helicobacter pylori possesses virulence genes that are involved in the
pathogenesis of the bacterium. There are little data regarding all constellations
of five polymorphic sites of H. pylori vacA and cagA status. We therefore aimed
to i) find any associations between H. pylori vacA alleles (s1/s2, m1/m2, i1/i2, 
d1/d2, and c1/c2) and cagA status and ii) determine the frequency of all
five-genotype combinations of the vacA alleles with and without cagA gene, and
their associations with risk of gastric cancer (GC). A total of 290 Iranian H.
pylori isolates from gastrointestinal patients were obtained successfully by the 
cultivation of biopsies and genotyped. The patients included 144/290 with
non-atrophic gastritis (NAG), 57/290 with peptic ulcer disease (PUD), and 89/290 
with GC. We found that each of the vacA m1-, i1-, d1-, and c1-genotypes was
significantly associated with cagA+ status. The odds ratio(OR) and 95% confidence
interval (95% CI) was 2.316 (1.241-4.301) for cagA+/vacA m1, 2.764 (1.540-4.960) 
for cagA+/vacA i1, 4.288 (2.305-7.977) for cagA+/vacA d1, and 2.639 (1.488-4.680)
for cagA+/vacA c1, respectively. In this study, 43 five- and six-genotype
combinations were found among 224 strains. The highest frequencies were observed 
for vacA s1m2i2d2c2 (85/224, 37.9%), s1m2i2d2c2/cagA (48/222, 21.6%), s1m1i1d1c1 
(40/224, 17.9%) and s1m1i1d1c1/cagA (35/222, 15.8%). Logistic regression analysis
showed that vacA s1m1i1d1c1, s1m2i1d2c1, s1m2i2d2c1, and s1m2i2d2c1/cagA had a
high prevalence in GC patients compared to non-atrophic gastritis patients
(p < .05). The ORs and 95% CI were 2.433 (1.070-5.531), 11.524 (1.253-106.023),
4.200 (1.261-13.993), and 6.263 (1.494-26.256), respectively. These results were 
also confirmed when the controls were non-tumors (NAG/PUD). We found novel five- 
and six-genotype combinations associated with the risk of GC. These associations 
seem to be strongly dependent on the presence of c1-type of vacA. Therefore,
analysis of all combined genotypes of the vacA alleles and cagA status may play a
significant role in determining H. pylori-related clinical outcomes.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.104167 
PMID: 31891782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.

