
1. Funct Integr Genomics. 2020 Jul;20(4):479-496. doi: 10.1007/s10142-019-00723-x.
Epub 2020 Jan 2.

Bacterial diversity and functional metagenomics expounding the diversity of
xenobiotics, stress, defense and CRISPR gene ontology providing eco-efficiency to
Himalayan Hot Springs.

Najar IN(1), Sherpa MT(1), Das S(1), Thakur N(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, Sikkim University, 6th
Mile, Samdur, Tadong, Gangtok, Sikkim, 737102, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, Sikkim University, 6th
Mile, Samdur, Tadong, Gangtok, Sikkim, 737102, India. nthakur@cus.ac.in.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biomolecular Engineering, Korean
Advance Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea.
nthakur@cus.ac.in.

Sikkim is one of the bio-diverse states of India, which harbors diverse alkaline 
and sulfur rich hot springs in its vicinity. However, there is a dearth of data
present in terms of microbial and its functional diversity as only a few hot
springs have been studied in this area. Thus, in this regard, microbial and
functional diversity of two hot springs by NGS, PLFA, and culture-independent
approaches were carried out. PLFA and culture-dependent analysis was
complementary as the Gram-positive bacteria were abundant in both the hot springs
with the dominance of phylum Firmicutes with Geobacillus. Metagenomic analysis
revealed the abundance of Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Firmicutes in both 
hot springs. Functional metagenomics suggested that both Yumthang and Reshi hot
spring possess a diverse set of genes analogous to stress such as genes allied to
osmotic, heat shock, and acid stresses; defense analogies such as multidrug
resistance efflux pump, multidrug transport system, and Î²-lactamase; and CRISPR
analogues such as related to Cas1, Cas2, Cas3, cmr1-5 proteins, CT1972, and
CT1133 gene families. The xenobiotic analogues were found against benzoate,
nitrotolune, xylene, DDT, and chlorocyclohexane/chlorobenzene degradation. Thus, 
these defensive mechanisms against environmental and anthropogenic hiccups and
hindrances provide the eco-efficiency to such thermal habitats. The higher
enzymatic, degradation, defense, stress potential and the lower percentage
identity (< 95%) of isolates encourage the further exploration and exploitation
of these habitats for industrial and biotechnological purposes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10142-019-00723-x 
PMID: 31897823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

