
1. Molecules. 2019 Dec 31;25(1). pii: E166. doi: 10.3390/molecules25010166.

Gelatin-Based Antimicrobial Films Incorporating Pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) 
Seed Juice by-Product.

Valdés A(1), Garcia-Serna E(1), Martínez-Abad A(1), Vilaplana F(2), Jimenez A(1),
Garrigós MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Alicante, Nutrition & Food
Sciences, ES-03690 San Vicente del Raspeig, Alicante, Spain.
(2)Division of Glycoscience, School of Biotechnology, KTH Royal Institute of
Technology, AlbaNova University Centre, 114 21 Stockholm, Sweden.

Pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) seed juice by-product (PSP) was added as
reinforcing and antimicrobial agent to fish gelatin (FG) films as a promising
eco-friendly active material for food packaging applications. A complete linkage 
analysis of polysaccharides in PSP showed xylan and cellulose as main components.
This residue showed also high total phenolic content and antioxidant activity.
Three formulations were processed by adding PSP to FG (0, 10, 30 wt. %) by the
casting technique, showing films with 10 wt. % of PSP the best performance. The
addition of PSP decreased elongation at break and increased stiffness in the FG
films, particularly for 30 wt. % loading. A good compatibility between FG and PSP
was observed by SEM. No significant (p < 0.05) differences were obtained for
barrier properties to oxygen and water vapour permeability compared to the
control with the incorporation of PSP, whereas water resistance considerably
increased and transparency values decreased (p < 0.05). High thermal stability of
films and inhibition against S. aureus were observed. The addition of PSP at 10
wt. % into FG was shown as a potential strategy to maintain the integrity of the 
material and protect food against lipid oxidation, reducing huge amounts of
pomegranate and fish wastes.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25010166 
PMCID: PMC6982764
PMID: 31906115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

