
1. Vet Microbiol. 2020 Jan;240:108533. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2019.108533. Epub 2019 
Nov 30.

Polyclonal infection as a new scenario in Mycobacterium caprae epidemiology.

Reis AC(1), Albuquerque T(2), Botelho A(2), Cunha MV(3).

Author information: 
(1)INIAV, IP - National Institute for Agrarian and Veterinary Research, Av. da
República, Quinta do Marquês, Edifício Principal, Piso 1, 2780 -157 Oeiras,
Portugal; cE3c - Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes,
Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Edifício C2, 4º Piso, Campo
Grande, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal; BioISI - Biosystems & Integrative Sciences
Institute, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Campo Grande,
1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)INIAV, IP - National Institute for Agrarian and Veterinary Research, Av. da
República, Quinta do Marquês, Edifício Principal, Piso 1, 2780 -157 Oeiras,
Portugal.
(3)INIAV, IP - National Institute for Agrarian and Veterinary Research, Av. da
República, Quinta do Marquês, Edifício Principal, Piso 1, 2780 -157 Oeiras,
Portugal; cE3c - Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes,
Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Edifício C2, 4º Piso, Campo
Grande, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal; BioISI - Biosystems & Integrative Sciences
Institute, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Campo Grande,
1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal. Electronic address: monica.cunha@iniav.pt.

Portugal is one of the European Union countries with an ongoing eradication
program for bovine tuberculosis (TB), which does not include systematic goat
testing. However, surveillance in small ruminants is increasingly important,
since goat and sheep can harbour Mycobacterium caprae and be an infection source 
to cattle with impact in the success of bovine TB control. Furthermore, the
information regarding the epidemiology and biology of M. caprae is quite limited 
comparing to the cognate bovine-adapted ecotype, M. bovis. In this work, we
applied spoligotyping and MIRU-VNTR (Mycobacterial Interspersed Repetitive
Units-Variable Number of Tandem Repeats) to M. caprae obtained between 2003 and
2014 from 55 animal hosts, including goat (n = 29), cattle (n = 21), sheep
(n = 1) and wild boar (n = 4) from Portugal. The molecular analysis revealed a
unique spoligotyping pattern (SB0157) and 24 MIRU types. Genotyping of serial M. 
caprae from herds with recurrent outbreaks enabled further discrimination of
epidemiologically related isolates, supporting a clonal structure in Portugal and
denoting the emergence of clonal diversity at the herd level, more apparent for
MIRU4. Results suggest a founder effect and adaptive genotypic divergence, paving
the way for sympatric speciation. Double allele findings at MIRU4 in over 20 % of
infected animals indicates that co-infection and in vivo microevolution may be
frequent in the goat-adapted ecotype. While polyclonal infection appears common
in M. caprae epidemiology, the functional significance of subtle genotypic
variations remains to be disclosed, namely at the interface with the host, to
expand knowledge on the epidemiology and biology of this neglected ecotype.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2019.108533 
PMID: 31902500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

