
1. PLoS One. 2020 Jan 13;15(1):e0227605. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227605.
eCollection 2020.

Molecular characterization of blaKHM-1 encoding plasmid in an Enterobacter
hormaechei subsp. hoffmannii isolate from blood culture.

Umeda K(1), Nakamura H(1), Fukuda A(1), Yamaguchi T(1), Matsumoto Y(2), Motooka
D(2), Nakamura S(2), Kawahara R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Osaka Institute of Public Health, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Genome Information Research Center, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

KHM-1 was first reported in 1997 in Japan as a novel metallo-Î²-lactamase mediated
by Citrobacter freundii carrying pKHM-1 plasmid. There have been few reports in
the clinical field since then. A blaKHM-1-positive Enterobacter hormaechei subsp.
hoffmannii in E. cloacae complex, isolate OIPH-N069 was isolated from an
inpatient blood culture in 2016. The isolate was characterized by whole-genome
sequencing, comparative analysis of the blaKHM-1 encoding plasmid, antimicrobial 
susceptibility tests, and bacterial conjugation. OIPH-N069 was classified into
ST78 of E. cloacae complex, and was multidrug resistant because of the presence
of antimicrobial resistance genes in addition to blaKHM-1 on its chromosome and
plasmids. blaKHM-1 was located on 136,816 bp of the IncA/C2 plasmid pN069-1,
which could be transferred to different bacterial species. The backbone
structure, genetic arrangement of the class 1 integron cassette, and the blaKHM-1
gene located downstream of the IncA/C2 antibiotic resistance island, ARI-A, in
pN069-1 and pKHM-1 were identical. Horizontal gene transfer of the
blaCTX-M-2-ISEcp1 resistance gene module only occurred with pN069-1. The study
findings indicate not only the structural conservation of blaKHM-1 encoding
plasmids over time and across species, but also the risk of the spread of
blaKHM-1 encoding plasmids to other bacterial species and the accumulation of
additional resistance genes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227605 
PMCID: PMC6957179
PMID: 31929575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

