
1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2019 Oct 1;12(10):3830-3838. eCollection 2019.

Risk factors and peripheral blood lymphocyte subset analysis of patients with
ventilator-associated pneumonia: a Chinese population-based study.

Zhang J(1), Deng R(1), Jia H(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Heze City Hospital Heze, Shandong
Province, China.

The aim of this study is to analyze and identify ventilator-associated pneumonia 
(VAP) risk factors related to pathogens and drug resistance, and explore the
theoretical guidance for clinical prevention and treatment strategies of VAP. 478
cases using a ventilator who were hospitalized in July 2014 to November 2016 in
our hospital were analyzed in this study. Among them there were 103 patients with
VAP. The distribution of pathogenic bacteria and drug resistance in VAP patients 
was detected and analyzed. 103 patients had VAP (21.5%, 103/478) among 478 cases 
of patients using a ventilator. Among the 103 patients with VAP, 35 patients died
and 43 had simultaneous sepsis. Compared with those of the non-VAP group, the
proportion of CD3+ (p = 0.012), CD3+ CD4+ (P = 0.024) and CD8+ CD28+ (P = 0.017) 
T cells in VAP group increased significantly, which showed a more severe immune
response. Multivariate regression model analysis revealed that tracheotomy for
mechanical ventilation (P = 0.013), mechanical ventilation time ≥ 7 days (P =
0.02) and aspiration and reflux (P = 0.011) were independent risk factors
associated with VAP. Multi-drugs resistance was observed in this study. Modality 
of mechanical ventilation, mechanical ventilation ≥ 7 days, and aspiration and
reflux were independent risk factors associated with VAP. According to the
results of bacterial culture and drug sensitivity test, rational selection of
antibiotics and monitoring of patients in the ICU can effectively control the
incidence of VAP and improve prognosis.

IJCEP Copyright © 2019.


PMCID: PMC6949756
PMID: 31933771 

Conflict of interest statement: None.

