
1. BMC Genomics. 2020 Jan 15;21(1):50. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-6456-9.

Transcriptome-based screening of intracellular pathways and angiogenesis related 
genes at different stages of thiram induced tibial lesions in broiler chickens.

Jahejo AR(1), Zhang D(1), Niu S(1), Mangi RA(1), Khan A(1), Qadir MF(1), Khan
A(1), Chen HC(2), Tian WX(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural
University, Taigu, 030801, China.
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural
University, Taigu, 030801, China. wenxiatian@126.com.

BACKGROUND: The Tibial dyschondroplasia (TD) in fast-growing chickens is mainly
caused by improper blood circulation. The exact mechanism underlying angiogenesis
and vascularization in tibial growth plate of broiler chickens remains unclear.
Therefore, this research attempts to study genes involved in the regulation of
angiogenesis in chicken red blood cells. Twenty-four broiler chickens were
allotted into a control and thiram (Tetramethyl thiuram disulfide) group. Blood
samples were collected on day 2, 6 (8- and 14-days old chickens) and 15 (23 days 
old chickens).
RESULTS: Histopathology and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) results showed that
angiogenesis decreased on the 6th day of the experiment but started to recover on
the 15th day of the experiment. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) results confirmed the 
expressions of integrin alpha-v precursor (ITGAV) and clusterin precursor (CLU). 
Transcriptome sequencing analysis evaluated 293 differentially expressed genes
(DEGs), of which 103 up-regulated genes and 190 down-regulated genes were
enriched in the pathways of neuroactive ligand receptor interaction,
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), ribosome, regulation of actin
cytoskeleton, focal adhesion, natural killer cell mediated cytotoxicity and the
notch signalling pathways. DEGs (n = 20) related to angiogenesis of chicken
erythrocytes in the enriched pathways were thromboxane A2 receptor (TBXA2R),
interleukin-1 receptor type 1 precursor (IL1R1), ribosomal protein L17 (RPL17),
integrin beta-3 precursor (ITGB3), ITGAV, integrin beta-2 precursor (ITGB2),
ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 2 (RAC2), integrin alpha-2 (ITGA2), IQ
motif containing GTPase activating protein 2 (IQGAP2), ARF GTPase-activating
protein (GIT1), proto-oncogene vav (VAV1), integrin alpha-IIb-like (ITGA5),
ras-related protein Rap-1b precursor (RAP1B), tyrosine protein kinase Fyn-like
(FYN), tyrosine-protein phosphatase non-receptor type 11 (PTPN11), protein
patched homolog 1 (PTCH1), nuclear receptor corepressor 2 (NCOR2) and mastermind 
like protein 3 (MAML3) selected for further confirmation with qPCR. However,
commonly DEGs were sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase 3 (ATP2A3), 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2 R2 (UBE2R2), centriole cilia and
spindle-associated protein (CCSAP), coagulation factor XIII A chain protein
(F13A1), shroom 2 isoform X6 (SHROOM2), ras GTPase-activating protein 3 (RASA3)
and CLU.
CONCLUSION: We have found potential therapeutic genes concerned to erythrocytes
and blood regulation, which regulated the angiogenesis in thiram induced TD
chickens. This study also revealed the potential functions of erythrocytes. 1.
Tibial dyschondroplasia (TD) in chickens were more on day 6, which started
recovering on day 15. 2. The enriched pathway observed in TD chickens on day 6
was ribosome pathway, on day 15 were regulation of actin cytoskeleton and focal
adhesion pathway. 3. The genes involved in the ribosome pathways was ribosomal
protein L17 (RPL17). regulation of actin cytoskeleton pathway were Ras-related C3
botulinum toxin substrate 2 (RAC2), Ras-related protein Rap-1b precursor (RAP1B),
ARF GTPase-activating protein (GIT1), IQ motif containing GTPase activating
protein 2 (IQGAP2), Integrin alpha-v precursor (ITGAV), Integrin alpha-2 (ITGA2),
Integrin beta-2 precursor (ITGB2), Integrin beta-3 precursor (ITGB3), Integrin
alpha-IIb-like (ITGA5). Focal adhesion Proto-oncogene vav (Vav-like),
Tyrosine-protein kinase Fyn-like (FYN).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-020-6456-9 
PMCID: PMC6964038
PMID: 31941444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

