
1. Methods Enzymol. 2020;631:371-389. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2019.08.010. Epub 2019 Oct
18.

Complementary approaches to study NKT cells in cancer.

Berzofsky JA(1), Olkhanud PB(2), Terabe M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. Electronic address:
berzofsj@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Vaccine Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(3)Neuro-Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.

NKT cells are a small but influential member of the T cell family, recognizing
lipids presented by the non-classical MHC-like molecule CD1d rather than peptides
presented by classical MHC molecules. They bridge between the innate and adaptive
immune systems, serving as rapid responders but also allowing the T cell immune
system to recognize lipid antigens, for example derived from tumors or bacteria. 
They also serve as potent regulatory cells, controlling other immune responses.
Type I NKT cells use a semi-invariant T cell receptor (TCR) whereas type II use
diverse TCRs. Most often, type I NKT cells promote tumor immunity whereas type II
tend to suppress it, and the two subtypes crossregulate each other, forming an
immunoregulatory axis. Lack of tools to study these important cells has limited
the understanding of these, but newer tools have allowed great advances,
especially in mouse models. These range from transgenic and knock-out mice to
CD1d tetramers carrying ligands for type I or II NKT cells, to antibodies and NKT
cell hybridomas. Here we describe these complementary tools and approaches and
their use to study NKT cells and their role in the immunology and immunotherapy
of cancer.

2020 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2019.08.010 
PMID: 31948558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

