
1. Integr Cancer Ther. 2020 Jan-Dec;19:1534735419900798. doi:
10.1177/1534735419900798.

Japanese Kampo Medicine Juzentaihoto Enhances Antitumor Immunity in CD1d-/- Mice 
Lacking NKT Cells.

Takaku S(1), Shimizu M(1), Takahashi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

Although the Japanese traditional herbal medicine (Kampo), Juzentaihoto (JTT),
has been reported to have antitumor effects in several tumor models, its role in 
tumor immunology remains controversial. In the present study, we tested whether
oral administration of JTT enhances antitumor immunity in CD1d-/- mice, in which 
immunosuppression was partially relieved due to the lack of NKT cells. In a
subcutaneous murine syngeneic CT26 colorectal tumor model, JTT had no impact on
tumor growth in wild type (WT) BALB/c mice. However, the growth rate of tumors
was significantly slower in CD1d-/- mice than in WT mice. Surprisingly, JTT
significantly delayed tumor growth in such CD1d-/- mice. In vivo depletion of
CD8+ T cells revealed that CD8+ T cells are required for JTT's antitumor
activity. Moreover, tumor-reactive cytotoxic T-lymphocytes were detected
exclusively in JTT-treated mice with well-controlled tumors. JTT did not affect
the number of tumor-infiltrating CD4+ regulatory T cells. On the contrary, JTT
increased the degranulation marker CD107a+ CD8+ T cells and decreased Ly6G+
Ly6Clo polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cells in tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes, most probably contributing to the suppression of tumor growth in
JTT-treated mice. Nonetheless, JTT had no impact on the proportion of monocytic
myeloid-derived suppressor cells. In conclusion, our results indicate that in the
absence of NKT cells, JTT augments antitumor immunity by CD8+ T cells, suggesting
that this Kampo medicine is a promising anticancer adjuvant when negative immune 
regulation is partially relieved.

DOI: 10.1177/1534735419900798 
PMCID: PMC6974754
PMID: 31959018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

