
1. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2020 Jun;46(3):1011-1018. doi: 10.1007/s10695-020-00766-z. 
Epub 2020 Jan 16.

Effects of dietary myo-inositol on growth, antioxidative capacity, and
nonspecific immunity in skin mucus of taimen Hucho taimen fry.

Wang C(1), Lu S(1), Li J(1), Wang L(1), Jiang H(2), Liu Y(1), Liu H(3), Han S(1),
Yin J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Heilongjiang River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, 43, Songfa Street, Harbin, 150070, People's Republic of China.
(2)College of Animal Science, Guizhou University, Guiyang, 550025, People's
Republic of China.
(3)Heilongjiang River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, 43, Songfa Street, Harbin, 150070, People's Republic of China.
gordoncase@126.com.

In this study, the effects of dietary myo-inositol on the skin mucosal immunity
and growth of taimen (Hucho taimen) fry were determined. Triplicate groups of 500
fish (initial weight 5.58 ± 0.15 g) were fed different diets containing graded
levels of myo-inositol (28.75, 127.83, 343.83, 565.81, and 738.15 mg kg-1) until 
satiation for 56 days. Thereafter, the nonspecific skin mucus immune parameters, 
antioxidative capacity, and growth performance were measured. The skin mucus
protein and the activities of alkaline phosphatase were significantly higher than
those in the control group (P < 0.05). However, there were no significant
differences in lysozyme activity among the treatments (P > 0.05). The
antimicrobial activity and minimum inhibitory concentration of the skin mucus
were increased significantly by myo-inositol supplementation (P < 0.05). The
superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase activities were
significantly elevated in the treatment groups (P < 0.05), whereas the
malondialdehyde contents were significantly decreased (P < 0.05). Low-level
myo-inositol (28.75 mg kg-1) led to a significantly lower weight gain, feed
efficiency, condition factor, and survival rate compared with the other
treatments (P < 0.05). In conclusion, dietary myo-inositol deficiency
(28.75 mg kg-1) adversely affects the skin mucus immune parameters, antioxidative
capacity, and growth performance of Hucho taimen fry.

DOI: 10.1007/s10695-020-00766-z 
PMID: 31950318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

