
1. mBio. 2020 Jan 21;11(1). pii: e02599-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02599-19.

The Integrity of the Cell Wall and Its Remodeling during Heterocyst
Differentiation Are Regulated by Phylogenetically Conserved Small RNA Yfr1 in
Nostoc sp. Strain PCC 7120.

Brenes-Álvarez M(1), Vioque A(1), Muro-Pastor AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain
alicia@ibvf.csic.es.

Yfr1 is a strictly conserved small RNA in cyanobacteria. A bioinformatic
prediction to identify possible interactions of Yfr1 with mRNAs was carried out
by using the sequences of Yfr1 from several heterocyst-forming strains, including
Nostoc sp. strain PCC 7120. The results of the prediction were enriched in genes 
encoding outer membrane proteins and enzymes related to peptidoglycan
biosynthesis and turnover. Heterologous expression assays with Escherichia coli
demonstrated direct interactions of Yfr1 with mRNAs of 11 of the candidate genes.
The expression of 10 of them (alr2458, alr4550, murC, all4829, all2158, mraY,
alr2269, alr0834, conR, patN) was repressed by interaction with Yfr1, whereas the
expression of amiC2, encoding an amidase, was increased. The interactions between
Yfr1 and the 11 mRNAs were confirmed by site-directed mutagenesis of Yfr1.
Furthermore, a Nostoc strain with reduced levels of Yfr1 had larger amounts of
mraY and murC mRNAs, supporting a role for Yfr1 in the regulation of those genes.
Nostoc strains with either reduced or increased expression of Yfr1 showed
anomalies in cell wall completion and were more sensitive to vancomycin than the 
wild-type strain. Furthermore, growth in the absence of combined nitrogen, which 
involves the differentiation of heterocysts, was compromised in the strain
overexpressing Yfr1, and filaments were broken at the connections between
vegetative cells and heterocysts. These results indicate that Yfr1 is an
important regulator of cell wall homeostasis and correct cell wall remodeling
during heterocyst differentiation.IMPORTANCE Bacterial small RNAs (sRNAs) are
important players affecting the regulation of essentially every aspect of
bacterial physiology. The cell wall is a highly dynamic structure that protects
bacteria from their fluctuating environment. Cell envelope remodeling is
particularly critical for bacteria that undergo differentiation processes, such
as spore formation or differentiation of heterocysts. Heterocyst development
involves the deposition of additional layers of glycolipids and polysaccharides
outside the outer membrane. Here, we show that a cyanobacterial phylogenetically 
conserved small regulatory RNA, Yfr1, coordinates the expression of proteins
involved in cell wall-related processes, including peptidoglycan metabolism and
transport of different molecules, as well as expression of several proteins
involved in heterocyst differentiation.

Copyright © 2020 Brenes-Álvarez et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02599-19 
PMCID: PMC6974561
PMID: 31964726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

