
1. FEBS J. 2020 Aug;287(16):3494-3510. doi: 10.1111/febs.15215. Epub 2020 Feb 4.

14-3-3 protein binding blocks the dimerization interface of caspase-2.

Kalabova D(1), Filandr F(2)(3), Alblova M(1), Petrvalska O(1)(4), Horvath
M(1)(4), Man P(2), Obsil T(1)(4), Obsilova V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division BIOCEV, Department of Structural Biology of Signaling Proteins,
Institute of Physiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Vestec, Czech Republic.
(2)Division BIOCEV, Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences,
Vestec, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague,
Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Physical and Macromolecular Chemistry, Faculty of Science,
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.

Among all species, caspase-2 (C2) is the most evolutionarily conserved caspase
required for effective initiation of apoptosis following death stimuli. C2 is
activated through dimerization and autoproteolytic cleavage and inhibited through
phosphorylation at Ser139 and Ser164 , within the linker between the caspase
recruitment and p19 domains of the zymogen, followed by association with the
adaptor protein 14-3-3, which maintains C2 in its immature form procaspase
(proC2). However, the mechanism of 14-3-3-dependent inhibition of C2 activation
remains unclear. Here, we report the structural characterization of the complex
between proC2 and 14-3-3 by hydrogen/deuterium mass spectrometry and protein
crystallography to determine the molecular basis for 14-3-3-mediated inhibition
of C2 activation. Our data reveal that the 14-3-3 dimer interacts with proC2 not 
only through ligand-binding grooves but also through other regions outside the
central channel, thus explaining the isoform-dependent specificity of 14-3-3
protein binding to proC2 and the substantially higher binding affinity of 14-3-3 
protein to proC2 than to the doubly phosphorylated peptide. The formation of the 
complex between 14-3-3 protein and proC2 does not induce any large conformational
change in proC2. Furthermore, 14-3-3 protein interacts with and masks both the
nuclear localization sequence and the C-terminal region of the p12 domain of
proC2 through transient interactions in which both the p19 and p12 domains of
proC2 are not firmly docked onto the surface of 14-3-3. This masked region of p12
domain is involved in C2 dimerization. Therefore, 14-3-3 protein likely inhibits 
proC2 activation by blocking its dimerization surface. DATABASES: Structural data
are available in the Protein Data Bank under the accession numbers 6SAD and 6S9K.

Â© 2020 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15215 
PMID: 31961068 

