
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Jan 20;8(1). pii: E141. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8010141.

A Comprehensive Study on the Occurrence of Mycotoxins and Their Producing Fungi
during the Maize Production Cycle in Spain.

García-Díaz M(1), Gil-Serna J(1), Vázquez C(1), Botia MN(2), Patiño B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physiology and Microbiology, Faculty of Biology,
University Complutense of Madrid, Jose Antonio Novais 12, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Laboratorio Arbitral Agroalimentario, Aguaron 13, 28023 Madrid, Spain.

Mycotoxin contamination is one of the main problems affecting corn production,
due to its significant risk to human and animal health. The Fusarium and
Aspergillus species are the main producers of mycotoxins in maize, infecting both
pre-harvest and during storage. In this work, we evaluated the presence of
mycotoxins and their producing species along maize production cycles in three
different stages (anthesis, harvest, and storage) during three consecutive
seasons (2016-2018). Fungal occurrences were studied using species-specific PCR
protocols, whereas mycotoxin levels were determined by LC-MS/MS.
Fumonisin-producing Fusarium species (F. verticillioides and F. proliferatum), as
well as the aflatoxin producer Aspergillus flavus, were the most predominant
species at all stages; although, during some seasons, the presence of F.
graminearum and A. niger aggregate species were also identified. Contrastingly,
fumonisins were the only mycotoxins detected and levels were always under legal
regulations. The results presented here demonstrate that even when fungal
contamination occurs at the early stages of the maize production cycle, the
application of good agricultural and storage practices might be crucial to ensure
mycotoxin-free grains.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8010141 
PMCID: PMC7023295
PMID: 31968531 

