
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Jan 23;8(2). pii: E158. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8020158.

CD209 and Not CD28 or STAT6 Polymorphism Mediates Clinical Malaria and
Parasitemia among Children from Nigeria.

Morenikeji OB(1), Metelski JL(1), Hawkes ME(1), Capria AL(1), Seamans BN(1),
Falade CO(2), Ojurongbe O(3), Thomas BN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, College of Medicine, University of 
Ibadan, Ibadan P.M.B 3017, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Ladoke Akintola
University of Technology, Osogbo P.M.B. 4000, Nigeria.

Malaria remains a significant disease, causing epic health problems and
challenges all over the world, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. CD209 and CD28
genes act as co-stimulators and regulators of the immune system, while the STAT6 
gene has been reported to mediate cytokine-induced responses. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms of these genes might lead to differential disease susceptibility
among populations at risk for malaria, due to alterations in the immune response.
We aim to identify key drivers of the immune response to malaria infection among 
the three SNPs: CD209 (rs4804803), CD28 (rs35593994) and STAT6 (rs3024974). After
approval and informed consent, we genotyped blood samples from a total of 531
children recruited from Nigeria using the Taqman SNP genotyping assay and
performed comparative analysis of clinical covariates among malaria-infected
children. Our results reveal the CD209 (rs4804803) polymorphism as a
susceptibility factor for malaria infection, significantly increasing the risk of
disease among children, but not CD28 (rs35593994) or STAT6 (rs3024974)
polymorphisms. Specifically, individuals with the homozygous mutant allele
(rs4804803G/G) for the CD209 gene have a significantly greater susceptibility to 
malaria, and presented with higher mean parasitemia. This observation may be due 
to a defective antigen presentation and priming, leading to an ineffective
downstream adaptive immune response needed to combat infection, as well as the
resultant higher parasitemia and disease manifestation. We conclude that the
CD209 gene is a critical driver of the immune response during malaria infection, 
and can serve as a predictor of disease susceptibility or a biomarker for disease
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8020158 
PMCID: PMC7074881
PMID: 31979279 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare we have no conflicts of
interest.

