
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020 Apr 1;148:1053-1060. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.220. Epub 2020 Jan 23.

Soluble beta-glucan salecan improves vaginal infection of Candida albicans in
mice.

Sun X(1), Gao Y(1), Ding Z(1), Zhao Y(1), Yang Y(1), Sun Q(1), Yang X(1), Ge
W(1), Xu X(1), Cheng R(1), Zhang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Metabolism, Nanjing University of Science & Technology,
Nanjing, China.
(2)Center for Molecular Metabolism, Nanjing University of Science & Technology,
Nanjing, China. Electronic address: jfzhang@mail.njust.edu.cn.

Vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC) is one of the most common infections in women. The
purpose of this study was to evaluate the ability of a water-soluble β-glucan
salecan to protect against Candida albicans (C. albicans) vaginal infection. The 
model was reproduced with intravaginal inoculation of yeast blastoconidia in
pseudoestrus mice. We found that mice that received salecan (0.5 mg per mouse)
after infection had 85% fewer CFU than infected mice given saline. Compared with 
the C.albicans group, salecan reduced the migration of polymorphonuclear
neutrophils (PMNs) in the vagina, decreased mRNA levels of cytokines IL23, IL22, 
IL17a, and IL17f, anti-candidal genes S100a8 and S100a9 and C.albicans pattern
recognition receptor Dectin1. The analysis for vaginal microbial community
composition at different taxa levels revealed that the bacterial flora
composition in the vagina of the salecan-treated mice was similar to that of the 
uninfected mice, and distinguished from the infected mice. The vaginal lavages
from the salecan treated group had more Enterococcus and its metabolite lactate. 
Our results suggest salecan might be a potential therapeutic agent for vaginal
infection of C.albicans.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.220 
PMID: 31982527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

