
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Apr 6;48(6):3228-3243. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz1240.

Good guide, bad guide: spacer sequence-dependent cleavage efficiency of Cas12a.

Creutzburg SCA(1), Wu WY(1), Mohanraju P(1), Swartjes T(1), Alkan F(2)(3),
Gorodkin J(2), Staals RHJ(1), van der Oost J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University and Research, Stippeneng 4, 
6708 WE Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Center for non-coding RNA in Technology and Health, Department of Veterinary
and Animal Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(3)Division of Oncogenomics, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 
CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Genome editing has recently made a revolutionary development with the
introduction of the CRISPR-Cas technology. The programmable CRISPR-associated
Cas9 and Cas12a nucleases generate specific dsDNA breaks in the genome, after
which host DNA-repair mechanisms can be manipulated to implement the desired
editing. Despite this spectacular progress, the efficiency of Cas9/Cas12a-based
engineering can still be improved. Here, we address the variation in
guide-dependent efficiency of Cas12a, and set out to reveal the molecular basis
of this phenomenon. We established a sensitive and robust in vivo targeting assay
based on loss of a target plasmid encoding the red fluorescent protein (mRFP).
Our results suggest that folding of both the precursor guide (pre-crRNA) and the 
mature guide (crRNA) have a major influence on Cas12a activity. Especially, base 
pairing of the direct repeat, other than with itself, was found to be detrimental
to the activity of Cas12a. Furthermore, we describe different approaches to
minimize base-pairing interactions between the direct repeat and the variable
part of the guide. We show that design of the 3' end of the guide, which is not
involved in target strand base pairing, may result in substantial improvement of 
the guide's targeting potential and hence of its genome editing efficiency.

Â© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz1240 
PMCID: PMC7102956
PMID: 31989168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

