
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jan 9;10:2858. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02858. eCollection
2019.

Intestinal Pioneer Colonizers as Drivers of Ileal Microbial Composition and
Diversity of Broiler Chickens.

Rodrigues DR(1), Winson E(1), Wilson KM(1), Briggs WN(1), Duff AF(1), Chasser
KM(1), Bielke LR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United
States.

Given that recent advances in metagenomics have highlighted the importance of
intestinal microbes for poultry health, there has been a corresponding search for
early manipulation strategies of intestinal microbiota in order to advance immune
system development and optimize functional properties of growth. In this study,
we used the in ovo technique as an experimental model to address how early
bacterial intestinal colonization could affect the development and establishment 
of the mature ileal microbiota. Inoculations containing one of the following: 0.2
mL of 0.9% sterile saline (S), approximately 102 cells of Citrobacter freundii
(CF), Citrobacter species (C2) or lactic acid bacteria mixture (L) were
administered via in ovo into the amnion. Results showed that Enterobacteriaceae
abundance was negatively correlated with aging, although its high population at
day of hatch affected the microbiota composition, delaying mature microbiota
establishment. L treatment increased colonization of butyrate-producing bacteria 
by 3 and 10 days, and segmented filamentous bacteria in the lower ileum by 10
days. On the other hand, L-probiotic decreased the population of Enterococcaceae.
In addition, L and C2 microbial communities were less diverse at 10 than 3 days
of age in the upper ileum. Importantly, these findings provide a valuable
resource for a potential study model for interactions between microbial
colonization and associated immune responses. In conclusion, our analysis
demonstrates that intestinal pioneer colonizers play a critical role in driving
the course of microbial community composition and diversity over time, in which
early life exposure to L-based probiotic supported selection alongside greater
colonization of symbiotic populations in the ileum of young broilers.

Copyright Â© 2020 Rodrigues, Winson, Wilson, Briggs, Duff, Chasser and Bielke.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02858 
PMCID: PMC6962117
PMID: 31998246 

