
1. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2020 Apr;188:110783. doi:
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2020.110783. Epub 2020 Jan 16.

Effects of statherin on the biological properties of titanium metals subjected to
different surface modification.

Lu X(1), Xiong S(1), Chen Y(1), Zhao F(1), Hu Y(1), Guo Y(1), Wu B(1), Huang
P(2), Yang B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Engineering Research Center in Biomaterials, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
610064, China; National Engineering Research Center for Biomaterials, Chengdu,
610064, China; Sichuan Guojia Biomaterials Co., Ltd, Chengdu, 610064, China.
(2)Panzhihua International Research Institute of Vanadium and Titanium, Panzhihua
University, 617000, Panzhihua, Sichuan, China.
(3)Engineering Research Center in Biomaterials, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
610064, China; National Engineering Research Center for Biomaterials, Chengdu,
610064, China; Sichuan Guojia Biomaterials Co., Ltd, Chengdu, 610064, China;
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Biomedical Functional Materials,
Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, 210046, China. Electronic address:
yangbchengc@126.com.

The failure of dental implants is usually caused by bacteria infection, poor
bioactivity and biocompatibility. It is a common phenomenon clinically.
Statherin, a salivary protein, plays a crucial role of mediator between materials
and cells/bacteria. However, the conformation of statherin might be changed by
the implants in vivo. In this study, we investigated the effects of statherin on 
the bioactivities, antibacterial abilities and biocompatibilities of the titanium
metals and the reaction mechanism. We found that the conformation of statherin
was mainly influenced by surface composition, surface structure, surface
roughness, surface hydrophilia and Ti-OH groups of materials. Statherin could
decrease the cell biocompatibility of the titanium metals including pure titanium
(PT), anodic oxidation (AO), sandblasting and etching (SLA) and plasma spraying
hydroxyapatite (HA) coating in HGF cell experiments, regulate the
bio-mineralization ability of HA coating in SBF, and enhance the antibacterial
properties of PT and HA coating. This study revealed that surface properties of
materials could change the conformation of statherin, which influenced the
bioactivities, antibacterial properties and biocompatibilities of the materials
in return.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2020.110783 
PMID: 32004907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest No conflict of 
interest exits in the submission of this manuscript, and manuscript is approved
by all authors for publication. I would like to declare on behalf of co-authors
that the work described was original research that has not been published
previously, and not under consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in
part. All the authors listed have approved that the manuscript is enclosed.

