
1. Curr Pharm Des. 2020;26(18):2116-2136. doi: 10.2174/1381612826666200128091506.

Thrombospondin-1 as a Potential Therapeutic Target: Multiple Roles in Cancers.

Wang P(1)(2)(3), Zeng Z(1)(2)(3), Lin C(1)(2)(3), Wang J(1)(2)(3), Xu W(1)(2)(3),
Ma W(1)(2)(3), Xiang Q(1)(2)(3), Liu H(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Liu SL(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center (State-Province Key Laboratories of
Biomedicine-Pharmaceutics of China), College of Pharmacy, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, 150081, China.
(2)HMU-UCCSM Centre for Infection and Genomics, Harbin, 150081, China.
(3)Translational Medicine Research and Cooperation Center of Northern China,
Heilongjiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Heilongjiang, China.
(4)Arnie Charbonneau Cancer Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, T2N 4N1,
Canada.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, T2N 4N1, Canada.

Thrombospondin-1, an extracellular matrix protein, is the first identified
natural angiogenesis inhibitor. Thrombospondin-1 participates in a great number
of physiological and pathological processes, including cell-cell and cell-matrix 
interactions via a number of cell receptors, including CD36 and CD47, which plays
a vital role in mediating inflammation and performs a promoting effect in
pulmonary arterial vasculopathy and diabetes. Thrombospondin-1 consists of six
domains, which combine with different molecules and participate in various
functions in cancers, serving as a critical member in diverse pathways in
cancers. Thrombospondin-1 works as a cancer promotor in some pathways but as a
cancer suppressor in others, which makes it highly possible that its erroneous
functioning might lead to opposite effects. Therefore, subdividing the roles of
thrombospondin-1 and distinguishing them in cancers are necessary. Complex
structure and multiple roles take disadvantage of the research and application of
thrombospondin-1. Compared with the whole thrombospondin-1 protein, each
thrombospondin- 1 active peptide performs an uncomplicated structure and,
nevertheless, a specific role. In other words, various thrombospondin-1 active
peptides may function differently. For instance, thrombospondin-1 could both
promote and inhibit glioblastoma, which is significantly inhibited by the three
type I repeats, a thrombospondin-1 active peptide but promoted by the fragment
167-569, a thrombospondin-1 active peptide consisting of the procollagen homology
domain and the three type I repeats. Further studies of the functions of
thrombospondin-1 active peptides and applying them reasonably are necessary. In
addition to mediating cancerogenesis, thrombospondin-1 is also affected by cancer
development, as reflected by its expression in plasma and the cancer tissue.
Therefore, thrombospondin-1 may be a potential biomarker for pre-clinical and
clinical application. This review summarizes findings on the multiple roles of
thrombospondin-1 in cancer processes, with a focus on its use as a potential
therapeutic target.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612826666200128091506 
PMID: 32003661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

