
1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2020 Jun;21(3):355-370. doi: 10.1007/s40257-020-00503-5.

Palmoplantar Pustulosis: Recent Advances in Etiopathogenesis and Emerging
Treatments.

Misiak-Galazka M(1), Zozula J(1), Rudnicka L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, Koszykowa 82A,
02-008, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, Koszykowa 82A,
02-008, Warsaw, Poland. lidiarudnicka@gmail.com.

Palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP) is a chronic, recurrent skin disease belonging to
the spectrum of psoriasis. It is characterized by an eruption of sterile pustules
on the palms and soles. Recent studies in PPP have focused on genetic differences
between pustular phenotypes and the role of the innate immunological system and
the microbiome in the etiopathogenesis of the disease. Mutations in IL36RN (a
major predisposing factor for generalized pustular psoriasis) were found in
selected patients with PPP and were associated with earlier disease onset.
Studies have shown that the interleukin (IL)-17 and IL-36 pathways might be
involved in the pathogenesis of PPP. A microbiome has been demonstrated in the
vesicopustules of PPP, and an abundance of Staphylococcus appears to be increased
by smoking. Improved understanding of the underlying etiopathogenesis of PPP has 
led to advances in treatment options, and targeted therapies for PPP have been
evaluated or are under evaluation against more than 12 molecules in ongoing
clinical trials. These targets include CXCR2 (IL-8 receptor type B), granulocyte 
colony-stimulating factor receptor, IL-1 receptor, IL-8, IL-12, IL-23, IL-17A,
IL-17 receptor, IL-36 receptor, phosphodiesterase-4, and tumor necrosis factor-Î±.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-020-00503-5 
PMCID: PMC7275027
PMID: 32008176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

