
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jan 30;21(3). pii: E887. doi: 10.3390/ijms21030887.

Lipidated Analogs of the LL-37-Derived Peptide Fragment KR12-Structural Analysis,
Surface-Active Properties and Antimicrobial Activity.

Kamysz E(1), Sikorska E(2), Jaśkiewicz M(3), Bauer M(3), Neubauer D(3),
Bartoszewska S(3), Barańska-Rybak W(4), Kamysz W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemistry of Biological Macromolecules, Department of Molecular 
Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdańsk, 80-308 Gdańsk, Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Structural Studies of Biopolymers, Department of Organic
Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdańsk, 80-308 Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of 
Gdańsk, 80-416 Gdańsk, Poland.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Faculty of Medicine,
Medical University of Gdańsk, 80-214 Gdańsk, Poland.

An increasing number of multidrug-resistant pathogens is a serious problem of
modern medicine and new antibiotics are highly demanded. In this study, different
n-alkyl acids (C2-C14) and aromatic acids (benzoic and trans-cinnamic) were
conjugated to the N-terminus of KR12 amide. The effect of this modification on
antimicrobial activity (ESKAPE bacteria and biofilm of Staphylococcus aureus) and
cytotoxicity (human red blood cells and HaCaT cell line) was examined. The effect
of lipophilic modifications on helicity was studied by CD spectroscopy, whereas
peptide self-assembly was studied by surface tension measurements and NMR
spectroscopy. As shown, conjugation of the KR12-NH2 peptide with C4-C14 fatty
acid chains enhanced the antimicrobial activity with an optimum demonstrated by
C8-KR12-NH2 (MIC 1-4 μg/mL against ESKAPE strains; MBEC of S. aureus 4-16 μg/mL).
Correlation between antimicrobial activity and self-assembly behavior of
C14-KR12-NH2 and C8-KR12-NH2 has shown that the former self-assembled into larger
aggregated structures, which reduced its antimicrobial activity. In conclusion,
N-terminal modification can enhance antimicrobial activity of KR12-NH2; however, 
at the same time, the cytotoxicity increases. It seems that the selectivity
against pathogens over human cells can be achieved through conjugation of peptide
N-terminus with appropriate n-alkyl fatty and aromatic acids.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21030887 
PMCID: PMC7036753
PMID: 32019109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.

