
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2020 Jul;52(4):2035-2041. doi: 10.1007/s11250-020-02228-3.
Epub 2020 Feb 3.

Replacing soybean meal with yeast-fermented cassava pulp (YFCP) on feed intake,
nutrient digestibilities, rumen microorganism, fermentation, and N-balance in
Thai native beef cattle.

Sommai S(1), Ampapon T(1), Mapato C(1), Totakul P(1), Viennasay B(1), Matra M(1),
Wanapat M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand.
(2)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand. metha@kku.ac.th.

The principle of the study was to assess the influence of yeast-fermented cassava
pulp (YFCP) as a protein supplement on feed intake, nutrient digestibilities,
rumen microbial protein synthesis, fermentation end-products, and N-balance in
Thai native beef cattle. The experiment was conducted following the 4 × 4 Latin
square design using 4 levels of YFCP supplementation (0, 100, 200, and
300 g/head/day) in 3-year-old Thai native beef cattle crossbreds. The response of
YFCP supplementation level using rice straw as a roughage source revealed
promising results. The rumen ecology parameters including cellulolytic,
amylolytic, and proteolytic bacterial population were significantly increased
while the protozoal population were reduced, as affected by increasing level of
YFCP supplementation (P < 0.05). In parallel with these results, totals VFA,
propionate (C3) production in the rumen, and the ratio of C2:C3 were remarkably
increased (P < 0.01), while rumen methane production by prediction from VFA was
decreased (P < 0.01), as YFCP supplementation increased. Regarding, the nutrient 
digestibilities, those of OM and CP were remarkably enhanced (P < 0.01), hence
increased DM intake. Furthermore, the use of YFCP at high level resulted in the
highest N-balance and N retention absorption (P < 0.01). The results indicated
that YFCP can be nutritionally enhanced by yeast fermentation, thus is promising 
to be used as a protein source in ruminant feeding.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-020-02228-3 
PMID: 32016880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

