
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2020 May;70(5):365-371. doi: 10.1111/lam.13281. Epub 2020
Feb 19.

Occurrence, virulence gene and antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of
Arcobacter sp. isolated from catla (Catla catla) in India.

Nelapati S(1), Tumati SR(1), Thirtham MR(2), Ramani Pushpa RN(1), Kamisetty
AK(1), Ch BK(1).

Author information: 
(1)NTR College of Veterinary Science, Gannavaram, Krishna District, Andhra
Pradesh, India.
(2)College of Veterinary Science, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India.

In the present study, a total of 100 catla (Catla catla-major South Asian carp,
local name botcha) collected from local fish markets and aquaculture ponds were
subjected for isolation and characterization of Arcobacter sp. In all, 21
Arcobacter sp. were isolated, of which 18 (85·7%) were Arcobacter butzleri and
three (14%) were A. cryoaerophilus as identified by multiplex PCR. All 18 A.
butzleri isolates were positive for mviN, ciaB and tlyA virulence genes, three of
A. cryoaerophilus isolates carried mviN gene and none of the isolates were
positive for cadF, irgA, cj1349, hecA and hecB genes. All isolates (n = 21) were 
resistant to penicillin (100%). Meanwhile, 71·43, 23·81, 23·81, 14·29 and 9·52%
of the isolates showed resistance towards vancomycin, nalidixic acid,
erythromycin, cefixime and kanamycin, respectively. Multidrug resistance was
observed in 23·81% of the Arcobacter sp. isolates and none of the isolates were
positive for any of the extended spectrum beta-lactamases either by phenotypic or
by molecular identification genes (blaOXA , blaSHV , blaTEM , blaCTX-M1 ,
blaCTX-M2 and blaCTX-M9 groups). The results emphasize the need to implement
specific control procedures to reduce the use of antibiotics in aquaculture
particularly the ones which are very important in human medicine. SIGNIFICANCE
AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Arcobacter species are emerging food- and water-borne
human pathogens. In this study, Arcobacter butzleri was predominant in fish
compared to A. cryoaerohilus and A. skirrowii. Higher incidence of arcobacters in
fish market samples suggests cross contamination and unhygienic handling of fish 
in markets. Virulence genes profile and antibiotics resistance of the Arcobacter 
sp. isolated in current study indicate pathogenic potential of Arcobacter sp. to 
humans. Occurrence of multidrug-resistant Arcobacter sp. in fish is a major
concern in food safety. To our knowledge, this is the first report of Arcobacter 
sp. from freshwater fish, catla (Catla catla) in India.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.13281 
PMID: 32012305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

