
1. PLoS One. 2020 Feb 6;15(2):e0228633. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228633.
eCollection 2020.

Exploratory examination of inflammation state, immune response and blood cell
composition in a human obese cohort to identify potential markers predicting
cancer risk.

Elisia I(1), Lam V(1), Cho B(1), Hay M(1), Li MY(1), Kapeluto J(2), Elliott T(3),
Harris D(4), Bu L(5), Jia W(5), Leung H(6), Mohn W(7), Krystal G(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)B.C Diabetes, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Richmond General Hospital Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery, Richmond, British
Columbia, Canada.
(5)Brain Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(6)Microbiome Insights, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(7)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Obesity has reached epidemic proportions and is often accompanied by elevated
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines that promote many chronic diseases,
including cancer. However, not all obese people develop these diseases and it
would be very helpful to identify those at high risk early on so that
preventative measures can be instituted. We performed an extensive evaluation of 
the effects of obesity on inflammatory markers, on innate and adaptive immune
responses, and on blood cell composition to identify markers that might be useful
in distinguishing those at elevated risk of cancer. Plasma samples from 42
volunteers with a BMI>35 had significantly higher CRP, PGE2, IL-1RA, IL-6 and
IL-17 levels than 34 volunteers with normal BMIs. Of the cytokines and chemokines
tested, only IL-17 was significantly higher in men with a BMI>35 than women with 
a BMI>35. As well, only IL-17 was significantly higher in those with a BMI>35
that had type 2 diabetes versus those without type 2 diabetes. Whole blood
samples from participants with a BMI>35, when challenged with E. coli, produced
significantly higher levels of IL-1RA while HSV-1 challenge resulted in
significantly elevated IL-1RA and VEGF, and a non-significant increase in G-CSF
and IL-8 levels. T cell activation of PBMCs, via anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28,
resulted in significantly higher IFNÎ³ production from volunteers with a BMI>35.
In terms of blood cells, red blood cell distribution width (RDW), monocytes,
granulocytes, CD4+T cells and Tregs were all significantly higher while, natural 
killer (NK) and CD8+ T cells were all significantly lower in the BMI>35 cohort,
suggesting that obesity may reduce the ability to kill nascent tumor cells.
Importantly, however, there was considerable person-to-person variation amongst
participants with a BMI>35, with some volunteers showing markedly different
values from controls and others showing normal levels of many parameters
measured. These person-to-person variations may prove useful in identifying those
at high risk of developing cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228633 
PMCID: PMC7004330
PMID: 32027700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

