
1. J Dent Res. 2020 May;99(5):561-567. doi: 10.1177/0022034520901738. Epub 2020 Feb 
5.

Entamoeba gingivalis Causes Oral Inflammation and Tissue Destruction.

Bao X(1), Wiehe R(1), Dommisch H(1), Schaefer AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Institute
for Dental and Craniofacial Sciences, Dept. of Periodontology and Synoptic
Dentistry, Berlin, Germany.

A metagenomics analysis showed a strongly increased frequency of the protozoan
Entamoeba gingivalis in inflamed periodontal pockets, where it contributed the
second-most abundant rRNA after human rRNA. This observation and the close
biological relationship to Entamoeba histolytica, which causes inflammation and
tissue destruction in the colon of predisposed individuals, raised our concern
about its putative role in the pathogenesis of periodontitis. Histochemical
staining of gingival epithelium inflamed from generalized severe chronic
periodontitis visualized the presence of E. gingivalis in conjunction with
abundant neutrophils. We showed that on disruption of the epithelial barrier, E. 
gingivalis invaded gingival tissue, where it moved and fed on host cells. We
validated the frequency of E. gingivalis in 158 patients with periodontitis and
healthy controls by polymerase chain reaction and microscopy. In the cases, we
detected the parasite in 77% of inflamed periodontal sites and 22% of healthy
sites; 15% of healthy oral cavities were colonized by E. gingivalis. In primary
gingival epithelial cells, we demonstrated by quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction that infection with E. gingivalis but not with the oral bacterial 
pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis strongly upregulated the inflammatory cytokine 
IL8 (1,900 fold, P = 2 × 10-4) and the epithelial barrier gene MUC21 (8-fold, P =
7 × 10-4). In gingival fibroblasts, we showed upregulation of the collagenase
MMP13 (11-fold, P = 3 × 10-4). Direct contact of E. gingivalis to gingival
epithelial cells inhibited cell proliferation. We indicated the strong virulence 
potential of E. gingivalis and showed that the mechanisms of tissue invasion and 
destruction are similar to the colonic protozoan parasite E. histolytica. In
conjunction with abundant colonization of inflamed periodontal sites and the
known resistance of Entamoeba species to neutrophils, antimicrobial peptides, and
various antibiotics, our results raise the awareness of this protozoan as a
potential and, to date, underrated microbial driver of destructive forms of
periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1177/0022034520901738 
PMID: 32023135  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

