
1. Langmuir. 2020 Mar 3;36(8):2110-2119. doi: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b03073. Epub
2020 Feb 19.

Interplay between Supramolecular and Coordination Interactions in Synthetic
Amphiphiles: Triggering Metal Starvation and Anchorage onto MRSA Cell Surface.

Dey P(1), Das G(2), Ramesh A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering Indian Institute of Technology
Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati
781039, India.

The present work highlights the implications of supramolecular interaction and
metal coordination on the self-assembly behavior and bactericidal potential of
salicaldehyde-(C1) and napthaldehyde-based (C2) amphiphiles against
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). LB trough and atomic force
microscope (AFM) analysis indicated the propensity of the amphiphiles to form a
monolayer as well as spherical aggregates, with the critical micelle
concentration (CMC) for C2 (7.0 μM) being lower than C1 (18.5 μM) in water.
Formation of an amphiphile-metal complex was evidenced by ESI-MS, FTIR,
FETEM-EDX, and ITC analysis. Growth of S. aureus MRSA 100 cells was remarkably
impaired in the presence of 5.0 μM C1 or 20 μM C2 as compared to free cells or
cells grown in the presence of equivalent levels of amphiphile-metal complexes,
suggesting that the amphiphiles perhaps sequester metal and induce metal
starvation in MRSA. C1 and C2 rendered superior membrane damage in MRSA and were 
less toxic to human embryonic kidney (HEK 293) cells as compared to their metal
complexes. C1 and C2 rendered a dose-dependent inhibition of S. aureus biofilm
formation, while revival of biofilm upon Zn(II) addition suggested that zinc
starvation rendered by the amphiphiles may induce biofilm inhibition. C1 imposed 
a concentration-dependent metal starvation response in MRSA as there was an
upregulation of the cntL gene and downregulation of cntA gene, which are involved
in synthesis of the zincophore staphylopine (Stp) and transport of the Stp-Zn
complex, respectively. ITC analysis revealed that binding of C1 and C2 to
staphylococcal lipoteichoic acid (LTA) was stronger than the corresponding Zn(II)
complexes, which perhaps accounted for the higher bactericidal potency of the
amphiphiles. The study provides a fundamental understanding on how the
chemistry-driven multimodal interaction of the amphiphile translates into growth 
inhibition and metal starvation in MRSA and advances the idea of combating drug
resistance in pathogenic bacteria through amphiphiles, which are pluri-active.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b03073 
PMID: 32031818 

