
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Apr 1;86(8). pii: e02620-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02620-19. Print 2020 Apr 1.

Pseudomonas orientalis F9 Pyoverdine, Safracin, and Phenazine Mutants Remain
Effective Antagonists against Erwinia amylovora in Apple Flowers.

Santos Kron A(#)(1), Zengerer V(#)(1), Bieri M(1), Dreyfuss V(1), Sostizzo T(2), 
Schmid M(3), Lutz M(4), Remus-Emsermann MNP(5)(6), Pelludat C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Agroscope, Research Division Plant Protection, Wädenswil, Switzerland.
(2)Agroscope, Research Division Phytosanitary Service, Wädenswil, Switzerland.
(3)Genexa AG, Zürich, Switzerland.
(4)Agroscope, Research Division Extension Vegetable Growth, Wädenswil,
Switzerland.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New
Zealand.
(6)Biomolecular Interaction Centre, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New
Zealand.
(7)Agroscope, Research Division Plant Protection, Wädenswil, Switzerland
cosima.pelludat@agroscope.admin.ch.
(#)Contributed equally

The recently characterized strain Pseudomonas orientalis F9, an isolate from
apple flowers in a Swiss orchard, exhibits antagonistic traits against
phytopathogens. At high colonization densities, it exhibits phytotoxicity against
apple flowers. P. orientalis F9 harbors biosynthesis genes for the siderophore
pyoverdine as well as for the antibiotics safracin and phenazine. To elucidate
the role of the three compounds in biocontrol, we screened a large random
knockout library of P. orientalis F9 strains for lack of pyoverdine production or
in vitro antagonism. Transposon mutants that lacked the ability for fluorescence 
carried transposons in pyoverdine production genes. Mutants unable to antagonize 
Erwinia amylovora in an in vitro double-layer assay carried transposon insertions
in the safracin gene cluster. As no phenazine transposon mutant could be
identified using the chosen selection criteria, we constructed a site-directed
deletion mutant. Pyoverdine-, safracin-, and phenazine mutants were tested for
their abilities to counteract the fire blight pathogen Erwinia amylovora ex vivo 
on apple flowers or the soilborne pathogen Pythium ultimum in vivo in a soil
microcosm. In contrast to some in vitro assays, ex vivo and in vivo assays did
not reveal significant differences between parental and mutant strains in their
antagonistic activities. This suggests that, ex vivo and in vivo, other factors, 
such as competition for resources or space, are more important than the tested
antibiotics or pyoverdine for successful antagonism of P. orientalis F9 against
phytopathogens in the performed assays.IMPORTANCE Pseudomonas orientalis F9 is an
antagonist of the economically important phytopathogen Erwinia amylovora, the
causal agent of fire blight in pomme fruit. On King's B medium, P. orientalis F9 
produces a pyoverdine siderophore and the antibiotic safracin. P. orientalis F9
transposon mutants lacking these factors fail to antagonize E. amylovora,
depending on the in vitro assay. On isolated flowers and in soil microcosms,
however, pyoverdine, safracin, and phenazine mutants control phytopathogens as
clearly as their parental strains.

Copyright © 2020 Santos Kron et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02620-19 
PMCID: PMC7117935
PMID: 32033956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

