
1. Cureus. 2020 Jan 29;12(1):e6809. doi: 10.7759/cureus.6809.

Comparison of Efficacy of Cannabinoids versus Commercial Oral Care Products in
Reducing Bacterial Content from Dental Plaque: A Preliminary Observation.

Stahl V(1), Vasudevan K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dentistry, Euro Dent Belgium, Mortsel, BEL.
(2)Genetics, Cannibite, Antwerp, BEL.

Background Dental plaque is a complex biofilm that gets formed on the teeth and
acts as a reservoir of different microbes. It is the root cause for the
occurrence of several dental problems and diseases, including cavities, bad
breath, bleeding gums, tooth decay, and tooth loss. Therefore, it should be
regularly removed using suitable oral care aids. Objectives The present study
compared the efficacy of oral care products and cannabinoids in reducing the
bacterial content of dental plaques. Methods Sixty adults aged 18 to 45 years
were categorized into six groups based on the Dutch periodontal screening index. 
Dental plaques of the adults were collected using paro-toothpick sticks and
spread on two Petri dishes, each with four divisions. On Petri dish-A,
cannabidiol (CBD), cannabichromene (CBC), cannabinol (CBN), and cannabigerol
(CBG) were used, and on Petri dish-B, cannabigerolic acid (CBGA), Oral B,
Colgate, and Cannabite F (a toothpaste formulation of pomegranate and algae) were
used. The Petri dishes were sealed and incubated, followed by counting the number
of colonies. Results By evaluating the colony count of the dental bacteria
isolated from six groups, it was found that cannabinoids were more effective in
reducing the bacterial colony count in dental plaques as compared to the
well-established synthetic oral care products such as Oral B and Colgate.
Conclusion Cannabinoids have the potential to be used as an effective
antibacterial agent against dental plaque-associated bacteria. Moreover, it
provides a safer alternative for synthetic antibiotics to reduce the development 
of drug resistance.

Copyright Â© 2020, Stahl et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.6809 
PMCID: PMC6991146
PMID: 32038896 

Conflict of interest statement: Veronica Stahl have pending patents (in process) 
for application of cannabinoids in dental care, personalization and treatments. .
Veronica Stahl also has a financial interest in CannIBite.

