
1. Molecules. 2020 Feb 4;25(3). pii: E661. doi: 10.3390/molecules25030661.

Hydrocarbon Removal by Two Differently Developed Microbial Inoculants and
Comparing Their Actions with Biostimulation Treatment.

Brzeszcz J(1), Kapusta P(1), Steliga T(2), Turkiewicz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Oil and Gas Institute-National Research Institute,
31-503 Krakow, ul. Lubicz 25A, Poland.
(2)Department of Reservoir Fluid Production Technology, Oil and Gas
Institute-National Research Institute, 31-503 Krakow, ul. Lubicz 25 A, Poland.

Bioremediation of soils polluted with petroleum compounds is a widely accepted
environmental technology. We compared the effects of biostimulation and
bioaugmentation of soil historically contaminated with aliphatic and polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons. The studied bioaugmentation treatments comprised of the
introduction of differently developed microbial inoculants, namely: an isolated
hydrocarbon-degrading community C1 (undefined-consisting of randomly chosen
degraders) and a mixed culture C2 (consisting of seven strains with
well-characterized enhanced hydrocarbon-degrading capabilities). Sixty days of
remedial treatments resulted in a substantial decrease in total aliphatic
hydrocarbon content; however, the action of both inoculants gave a significantly 
better effect than nutrient amendments (a 69.7% decrease for C1 and 86.8% for C2 
vs. 34.9% for biostimulation). The bioaugmentation resulted also in PAH removal, 
and, again, C2 degraded contaminants more efficiently than C1 (reductions of
85.2% and 64.5%, respectively), while biostimulation itself gave no significant
results. Various bioassays applying different organisms (the bacterium Vibrio
fischeri, the plants Sorghum saccharatum, Lepidium sativum, and Sinapis alba, and
the ostracod Heterocypris incongruens) and Ames test were used to assess,
respectively, potential toxicity and mutagenicity risk after bioremediation. Each
treatment improved soil quality, however only bioaugmentation with the C2
treatment decreased both toxicity and mutagenicity most efficiently. Illumina
high-throughput sequencing revealed the lack of (C1) or limited (C2) ability of
the introduced degraders to sustain competition from indigenous microbiota after 
a 60-day bioremediation process. Thus, bioaugmentation with the bacterial mixed
culture C2, made up of identified, hydrocarbon-degrading strains, is clearly a
better option for bioremediation purposes when compared to other treatments.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25030661 
PMCID: PMC7036810
PMID: 32033085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

