
1. J Dairy Sci. 2020 Apr;103(4):3565-3576. doi: 10.3168/jds.2019-17281. Epub 2020
Feb 7.

Molecular epidemiology of Streptococcus uberis intramammary infections:
Persistent and transient patterns of infection in a dairy herd.

Leelahapongsathon K(1), Schukken YH(2), Srithanasuwan A(3), Suriyasathaporn W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Kasetsart University, Nakhon Pathom, 73140 Thailand.
(2)GD Animal Health, PO Box 9, 7400 AA Deventer, the Netherlands; Department of
Animal Sciences, Wageningen University, PO 9101, 6700 HB, Wageningen, the
Netherlands.
(3)Research Center of Producing and Development of Products and Innovations for
Animal Health and Production, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, 50100 Thailand.
(4)Research Center of Producing and Development of Products and Innovations for
Animal Health and Production, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, 50100 Thailand. Electronic address:
suriyasathaporn@hotmail.com.

A longitudinal observational study was carried out to explore transmission
dynamics and duration of infection of Streptococcus uberis. Quarter milk samples 
were collected aseptically for bacterial culture from all lactating cows once a
month over a 10-mo period. Molecular typing of S. uberis mastitis was performed
using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). Molecular typing was used to
determine episodes of S. uberis intramammary infection (IMI). Comparisons of
spontaneous cure among PFGE types were performed using Fisher's exact chi-squared
tests. Differences of duration among PFGE types and between periods of lactation 
were tested with Kaplan-Meier survival curves and Cox's proportional hazard
model. Among a total of 851 quarter samples, 145 milk samples were detected with 
S. uberis presence. Based on results of PFGE, 66 episodes of S. uberis IMI were
determined. From the 8 main PFGE types (A-H), PFGE type D, E, F1, F2, G, and H
had only one episode indicating no evidence for transmission, subsequently
defined as environmental S. uberis strains. In contrast, PFGE types A1, A2, B,
C1, and C2 had at least 2 infection episodes caused by the same strain in
different quarters or cows, indicating that these strains would be able to
transmit to other quarters or cows. These strains were defined as contagious
strains. The majority of IMI were attributable to PFGE type A1 (55%), B (17%),
and A2 (11%). Spontaneous cures were observed in 35 IMI episodes. Of these 35 IMI
cures, 91.4% were in IMI with duration of infection of 1 mo, n = 25, and 2 mo, n 
= 6. The remaining 8.6% was in IMI with duration of infection >2 mo, n = 4. Based
on results from Cox's proportional hazard model, environmental S. uberis episodes
were likely to have spontaneous cure with shorter duration compared with
contagious S. uberis with PFGE type B (hazard ratio = 8.4). Quarters infected
with S. uberis strain PFGE type A in early lactation were more likely to persist 
compared with those infected in late lactation (hazard ratio = 7.57). In
conclusion, the majority of S. uberis IMI in this herd were transient and showed 
spontaneous cure. In addition to environmental S. uberis IMI, at least 3 types of
contagious IMI S. uberis can be defined as (1) short duration of IMI and likely
to have spontaneous cure, (2) long duration and unlikely to have spontaneous
cure, and (3) wide range of duration of IMI either transient or persistent where 
spontaneous cure may occur depending on host defense capacity.

Copyright Â© 2020 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2019-17281 
PMID: 32037160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

