
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jan 28;10:3159. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.03159. eCollection 
2019.

CusS-CusR Two-Component System Mediates Tigecycline Resistance in
Carbapenem-Resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Chen D(1)(2), Zhao Y(1), Qiu Y(1), Xiao L(1), He H(1), Zheng D(1), Li X(3), Yu
X(3), Xu N(3), Hu X(2), Chen F(2), Li H(1)(3), Chen Y(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shengli Clinical Medical College of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, China.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Fujian Provincial
Hospital, Fuzhou, China.

Background: The increase in carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae (CRKP),
especially the emergence of tigecycline-resistant K. pneumoniae (KP), is a
serious public health concern. However, the underlying mechanism of tigecycline
resistance is unclear. In this study, we evaluated the role of the CusS-CusR
two-component system (TCS), which is associated with copper/silver resistance, in
tigecycline resistance in CRKP.
Methods: Following the in vitro evolution of tigecycline-resistant KP, the
minimum inhibitory concentrations of tigecycline were determined using the
micro-broth dilution method. RNA sequencing and data analysis were performed to
identify differentially expressed genes. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed to
verify the genes of interest. Genes associated with tigecycline resistance, such 
as ramR, tex (T), and tet (A), were detected by PCR, and then mutants were
confirmed by sequencing. Additionally, the efflux pump-associated genes soxS,
oqxA, oqxB, acrE, and acrF were also analyzed by qPCR. CusR was deleted and
complemented by the suicide vector pKO3-Km plasmid and pGEM-T-easy plasmid,
respectively.
Results: Nine strains of KP were evaluated in our study. Strains A2 and A3 were
evolved from A1, B2, and B3 were evolved from B1, and C2 and C3 were evolved from
C1. The tigecycline minimum inhibitory concentration for A1, B1, and C1 was 0.5
μg/mL; that for A2, B2, and C3 was 16.0 μg/mL; and that for A3, B3, and C3 was
32.0 μg/mL. RNA-sequencing and qPCR confirmed that the differentially expressed
genes cusE, cusS, cusR, cusC, cusF, cusB, and cusA showed higher expression in C2
and C3 than in C1. Genes related to the efflux pump AcrAB-TolC showed higher
expression in B2 and B3 than in B1. No mutants of ramR, tex (T), or tet (A) were 
detected. SoxS, oqxA, oqxB, acrE, and acrF did not show increased expression in
any group. After deletion and complementation of cusR among C3, the MIC of
tigecycline decreased to 4 μg/mL, and then recovered to 32 μg/mL. The expression 
of cusFBCA, correspondingly decreased and increased significantly.
Conclusion: In addition to its primary function in resistance to copper/silver,
the CusS-CusR two-component system is associated with CRKP resistance to
tigecycline.

Copyright © 2020 Chen, Zhao, Qiu, Xiao, He, Zheng, Li, Yu, Xu, Hu, Chen, Li and
Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.03159 
PMCID: PMC6997431
PMID: 32047485 

