
1. J Periodontol. 1988 Nov;59(11):741-9.

The comparative cytotoxicity of periodontal bacteria.

Stevens RH(1), Hammond BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104.

The direct cytotoxicity of sonic extracts (SE) from nine periodontal bacteria for
human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) was compared. Equivalent dosages (in terms of
protein concentration) of SE were used to challenge HGF cultures. The cytotoxic
potential of each SE was assessed by its ability to (1) inhibit HGF
proliferation, as measured by direct cell counts; (2) inhibit 3H-thymidine
incorporation in HGF cultures; or (3) cause morphological alterations of the
cells in challenged cultures. The highest concentration (500 micrograms SE
protein/ml) of any of the SEs used to challenge the cells was found to be
markedly inhibitory to the HGFs by all three of the criteria of cytotoxicity. At 
the lowest dosage tested (50 micrograms SE protein/ml); only SE from
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Bacteroides gingivalis, and Fusobacterium
nucleatum caused a significant effect (greater than 90% inhibition or overt
morphological abnormalities) in the HGFs as determined by any of the criteria
employed. SE from Capnocytophaga sputigena, Eikenella corrodens, or Wolinella
recta also inhibited cell proliferation and thymidine incorporation at this
dosage; however, the degree of inhibition (5-50%) was consistently, clearly less 
than that of the first group of three organisms named above. The SE of the three 
other organisms tested (Actinomyces odontolyticus, Bacteroides intermedius, and
Streptococcus sanguis) had little or no effect (0-10% inhibition) at this
concentration. The data suggest that the outcome of the interaction between
bacterial components and normal resident cells of the periodontium is, at least
in part, a function of the bacterial species.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.1988.59.11.741 
PMID: 3204481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

