
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2020 Apr;27(12):14207-14215. doi:
10.1007/s11356-020-07994-z. Epub 2020 Feb 10.

Changes of various insecticides during in vitro human digestion.

Kim HS(1), Lee SY(2), Hur SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Life and Environment Science, Hankyong National
University, 327 Jungang-ro, Anseong-si, 17579, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Animal Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, 4726
Seodong-daero, Daedeok-myeon, Anseong-si, Gyeonggi, 17546, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Animal Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, 4726
Seodong-daero, Daedeok-myeon, Anseong-si, Gyeonggi, 17546, Republic of Korea.
hursj@cau.ac.kr.

This study was performed to determine the effects of in vitro human digestion on 
the concentrations of five insecticides, namely
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT),
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDD),
2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-1,1-dichloroethylene (DDE), bifenthrin, and fipronil. In 
vitro models included all the steps of human digestion, i.e., passage through the
mouth, stomach, small intestine, and large intestine (with enteric bacteria). The
concentrations of DDT and fipronil did not change (P > 0.05) until small
intestinal digestion, whereas those of DDD, DDE, and bifenthrin decreased
(P < 0.05) at each digestion step. The concentrations of all the insecticides
decreased (P < 0.05) during the large intestinal digestion step with enteric
bacteria, Lactobacillus sakei and Escherichia coli. In conclusion, the
concentrations of all the tested insecticides decreased during all the steps of
in vitro human digestion and were especially reduced by enteric bacteria during
the large intestinal digestion step.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-020-07994-z 
PMID: 32043247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

