
1. Mod Pathol. 2020 Jul;33(7):1380-1388. doi: 10.1038/s41379-020-0498-z. Epub 2020
Feb 12.

Multiparametric in situ imaging of NPM1-mutated acute myeloid leukemia reveals
prognostically-relevant features of the marrow microenvironment.

Patel SS(1)(2), Lipschitz M(3), Pinkus GS(2), Weirather JL(3), Pozdnyakova O(2), 
Mason EF(4), Inghirami G(1), Hasserjian RP(5), Rodig SJ(2)(3), Weinberg OK(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Center for Immuno-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
olga.weinberg@childrens.harvard.edu.
(7)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
olga.weinberg@childrens.harvard.edu.

Ancillary testing during the initial workup of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is
largely performed using aspirated materials. We utilized multiplex
immunofluorescence (MIF) imaging with digital image analysis to perform an in
situ analysis of the microenvironment in NPM1-mutated AML using diagnostic bone
marrow biopsy tissues (N = 17) and correlated these findings with diagnostic
next-generation sequencing (NGS, N = 17), flow cytometry (FC, N = 14), and first 
remission (CR1) NPM1-specific molecular MRD (n = 16) data. The total CD3-positive
T-cell percentages correlated positively between FC and MIF (r = 0.53, p = 0.05),
but were significantly lower by MIF (1.62% vs. 3.4%, p = 0.009). The percentage
of mutant NPM1-positive (NPM1c+) cells ranged from 9.7 to 90.8% (median 45.4%)
and did not correlate with the NPM1 mutant allele fraction by NGS (p > 0.05). The
percentage of CD34+/NPM1c+ cells ranged from 0 to 1.8% (median 0.07%). The
percentage of NPM1c+ cells correlated inversely (34% vs. 62%, p = 0.03), while
the percentages of CD3-/NPM1c- cells (64% vs. 35%, p = 0.03), and specifically
CD3-/CD4-/NPM1c- cells (26% vs. 13%, p = 0.04), correlated positively with
subsequent MRD. Discordances between MIF and FC/NGS data suggest that aspirate
materials are likely an imperfect reflection of the core biopsy tissue.
Furthermore, increased numbers of NPM1 wild-type cells within the
microenvironment at diagnosis correlate with the subsequent presence of MRD.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-020-0498-z 
PMID: 32051557 

