
1. Vet Res. 2020 Feb 13;51(1):11. doi: 10.1186/s13567-020-0740-1.

Differences in virulence between the two more prevalent Staphylococcus aureus
clonal complexes in rabbitries (CC121 and CC96) using an experimental model of
mammary gland infection.

Penadés M(1), Viana D(1), García-Quirós A(1), Muñoz-Silvestre A(1), Moreno-Grua
E(1), Pérez-Fuentes S(1), Pascual JJ(2), Corpa JM(3), Selva L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute (PASAPTA-Pathology Group), Facultad de
Veterinaria, Universidad Cardenal Herrera-CEU, CEU Universities. C/Tirant lo
Blanc 7, Alfara del Patriarca, 46115, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Institute for Animal Science and Technology, Universitat Politècnica de
València, Camino de Vera 14, 46071, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Biomedical Research Institute (PASAPTA-Pathology Group), Facultad de
Veterinaria, Universidad Cardenal Herrera-CEU, CEU Universities. C/Tirant lo
Blanc 7, Alfara del Patriarca, 46115, Valencia, Spain. jmcorpa@uchceu.es.
(4)Biomedical Research Institute (PASAPTA-Pathology Group), Facultad de
Veterinaria, Universidad Cardenal Herrera-CEU, CEU Universities. C/Tirant lo
Blanc 7, Alfara del Patriarca, 46115, Valencia, Spain. lselva@uchceu.es.

Staphylococcal mastitis is a major health problem in humans and livestock that
leads to economic loss running in millions. This process is currently one of the 
main reasons for culling adult rabbit does. Surprisingly, the two most prevalent 
S. aureus lineages isolated from non-differentiable natural clinical mastitis in 
rabbits (ST121 and ST96) generate different immune responses. This study aimed to
genetically compare both types of strains to search for possible dissimilarities 
to explain differences in immune response, and to check whether they showed
similar virulence in in vitro tests as in experimental intramammary in vivo
infection. The main differences were observed in the enterotoxin gene cluster
(egc) and the immune-evasion-cluster (IEC) genes. While isolate ST121 harboured
all six egc cluster members (seg, sei, selm, seln, selo, selu), isolate ST96
lacked the egc cluster. Strain ST96 carried a phage integrase Sa3 (Sa3int),
compatible with a phage integrated into the hlb gene (β-haemolysin-converting
bacteriophages) with IEC type F, while isolate ST121 lacked IEC genes and the hlb
gene was intact. Moreover, the in vitro tests confirmed a different virulence
capacity between strains as ST121 showed greater cytotoxicity for erythrocytes,
polymorphonuclear leukocytes and macrophages than strain ST96. Differences were
also found 7 days after experimental intramammary infection with 100
colony-forming units. The animals inoculated with strain ST121 developed more
severe gross and histological mastitis, higher counts of macrophages in tissue
and of all the cell populations in peripheral blood, and a significantly larger
total number of bacteria than those infected by strain ST96.

DOI: 10.1186/s13567-020-0740-1 
PMCID: PMC7020377
PMID: 32054530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

