
1. Gene. 2020 May 5;737:144450. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.144450. Epub 2020 Feb 11.

mRNA profiling reveals response regulators of decreased fungal keratitis symptoms
in a tree shrew model.

Jia J(1), Wang W(1), Kuang D(1), Lu C(1), Li N(1), Tong P(1), Han Y(1), Sun X(1),
Dai J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking
Union Medical College, Kunming, China; Yunnan Key Laboratory of Vaccine Research 
and Development on Severe Infectious Diseases, Kunming, China; Yunnan Innovation 
Team of Standardization and Application Research in Tree Shrew, Kunming, China.
(2)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking
Union Medical College, Kunming, China; Yunnan Key Laboratory of Vaccine Research 
and Development on Severe Infectious Diseases, Kunming, China; Yunnan Innovation 
Team of Standardization and Application Research in Tree Shrew, Kunming, China.
Electronic address: djj@imbcams.com.cn.

Fungal keratitis is a corneal disease with a high blindness rate caused by
pathogenic fungal infections. The pathogenesis of fungal keratitis and the immune
response after fungal infection are still unclear. Notably, the pathological
features of fungal keratitis in tree shrews are similar to those in humans. In
the present study, mRNA profiling of tree shrew corneas with fungal keratitis was
performed. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were performed on the differentially
expressed mRNAs, and the GO biological process ontology was used to analyze
functional trends in the differentially expressed mRNAs. In total, 151
downregulated and 71 upregulated mRNAs were shared among the 7-day, 14-day and
30-day infection groups. These differentially expressed mRNAs were significantly 
enriched in the GO category immune response (GO: 0002376) and the KEGG pathways
cytokine receptor binding (KEGG ID: tup04060) and cell adhesion (KEGG ID:
tup04514). The downregulated mRNAs were significantly enriched in the corneal
epithelial cell adhesion function. Fifty-eight initially upregulated mRNAs
gradually decreased in expression, and these mRNAs were significantly enriched in
the functions lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and antibacterial polypeptide recognition,
cell differentiation, and cell rearrangement. Zeta chain of T-cell receptor
associated protein kinase 70 (ZAP70), lymphocyte cytosolic protein 2 (LCP2), C-C 
motif chemokine and its receptor showed high degrees of connectivity in the
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. We speculate that the decrease in
symptoms of tree shrew fungal keratitis may be related to the upregulation of
genes involved in immune regulation and macrophage colony stimulation. This study
showed that the C-C motif chemokine and its receptor may play a key role in
regulating tree shrew fungal keratitis, providing a theoretical basis for
studying the pathogenesis of human fungal keratitis.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.144450 
PMID: 32057930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

