
1. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2020 Feb 17;19(1):20. doi: 10.1186/s12933-020-0993-z.

Vascular miR-181b controls tissue factor-dependent thrombogenicity and
inflammation in type 2 diabetes.

Witkowski M(1), Witkowski M(2), Saffarzadeh M(3), Friebel J(1), Tabaraie T(1), Ta
Bao L(1), Chakraborty A(1), Dörner A(1), Stratmann B(4), Tschoepe D(4), Winter
SJ(5), Krueger A(5), Ruf W(3), Landmesser U(1), Rauch U(6).

Author information: 
(1)Charité Centrum 11, Department of Cardiology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Research Centre Immunology and Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, 
University of Mainz Medical Centre, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Center for Thrombosis and Hemostasis, University Medical Center of the
Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
(4)Heart and Diabetes Center NRW, Ruhr University of Bochum, Bad Oeynhausen,
Germany.
(5)Institute for Molecular Medicine, Goethe-University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.
(6)Charité Centrum 11, Department of Cardiology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany.
ursula.rauch@charite.de.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus is characterized by chronic vascular inflammation
leading to pathological expression of the thrombogenic full length (fl) tissue
factor (TF) and its isoform alternatively-spliced (as) TF. Blood-borne TF
promotes factor (F) Xa generation resulting in a pro-thrombotic state and
cardiovascular complications. MicroRNA (miR)s impact gene expression on the
post-transcriptional level and contribute to vascular homeostasis. Their distinct
role in the control of the diabetes-related procoagulant state remains poorly
understood.
METHODS: In a cohort of patients with poorly controlled type 2 diabetes (n = 46) 
plasma levels of miR-181b were correlated with TF pathway activity and markers
for vascular inflammation. In vitro, human microvascular endothelial cells
(HMEC)-1 and human monocytes (THP-1) were transfected with miR-181b or
anti-miR-181b and exposed to tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α or lipopolysaccharides
(LPS). Expression of TF isoforms, vascular adhesion molecule (VCAM) 1 and nuclear
factor (NF) κB nuclear translocation was assessed. Moreover, aortas, spleen,
plasma, and bone marrow-derived macrophage (BMDM)s of mice carrying a deletion of
the first miR-181b locus were analyzed with respect to TF expression and
activity.
RESULTS: In patients with type 2 diabetes, plasma miR-181b negatively correlated 
with the procoagulant state as evidenced by TF protein, TF activity, D-dimer
levels as well as markers for vascular inflammation. In HMEC-1, miR-181b
abrogated TNFα-induced expression of flTF, asTF, and VCAM1. These results were
validated using the anti-miR-181b. Mechanistically, we confirmed a
miR-181b-mediated inhibition of importin-α3 (KPNA4) leading to reduced nuclear
translocation of the TF transcription factor NFκB. In THP-1, miR-181b reduced
both TF isoforms and FXa generation in response to LPS due to targeting
phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), a principal inducer for TF in monocytes.
Moreover, in miR-181-/- animals, we found that reduced levels of miR-181b were
accompanied by increased TF, VCAM1, and KPNA4 expression in aortic tissue as well
as increased TF and PTEN expression in spleen. Finally, BMDMs of miR-181-/- mice 
showed increased TF expression and FXa generation upon stimulation with LPS.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-181b epigenetically controls the procoagulant state in diabetes.
Reduced miR-181b levels contribute to increased thrombogenicity and may help to
identify individuals at particular risk for thrombosis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12933-020-0993-z 
PMCID: PMC7027062
PMID: 32066445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

