
1. Curr Microbiol. 2020 Jul;77(7):1191-1202. doi: 10.1007/s00284-020-01920-9. Epub
2020 Feb 23.

Impacts of Prebiotic-Supplemented Diets and Breastmilk on Population and
Diversity of Lactobacilli Established in Thai Healthy Infants.

Kongnum K(1), Taweerodjanakarn S(1), Hongpattarakere T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Biotechnology, Faculty of Agro-Industry, Prince of
Songkla University, Hat Yai, Songkhla, 90110, Thailand.
(2)Department of Industrial Biotechnology, Faculty of Agro-Industry, Prince of
Songkla University, Hat Yai, Songkhla, 90110, Thailand. tipparat.h@psu.ac.th.

The relative abundance and diversity of lactobacilli present in feces of infants 
fed with breastmilk and fructooligosaccharide-galactooligosaccharide (FOS-GOS)-, 
and inulin-galactooligosaccharide (inulin-GOS)-supplemented infant formulae and
combination of both were compared. Fecal lactobacilli rapidly colonized and
reached maximum total cell counts, which were significantly higher in the infants
fed by combining breastmilk with a formula containing either FOS-GOS (C1-A
infant) or inulin-GOS (C2-C infant) and the exclusively formula fed ones (F1-F
and F2-H infants) than those detected in the exclusively breast-fed (B1-D and
B2-E infants) (P < 0.05). The greatest relative abundance of fecal lactobacilli
species was observed in all infant receiving prebiotic-containing diets, whereas 
bifidobacteria appeared predominantly in exclusively breast-fed infants. The
species composition of lactobacilli was highly unique among individual and more
variable in both groups of infants receiving breastmilk than the exclusively
formula-fed infants. Breastmilk seem to be a great source of indigenous
lactobacilli vertically transferred and continuously seeded infants' gut.
Meanwhile, prebiotic supplementation in infant formulae enhanced and sustained
the successful colonization of lactobacilli.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-020-01920-9 
PMID: 32088749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

