
1. Mediators Inflamm. 2020 Feb 3;2020:4185273. doi: 10.1155/2020/4185273.
eCollection 2020.

Regulation of Cyclooxygenase 2 by Filifactor alocis in Fibroblastic and Monocytic
Cells.

Nokhbehsaim M(1), Nogueira AVB(2), Nietzsche S(3), Eick S(4), Deschner J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Dento-Maxillo-Facial Medicine, Center of
Dento-Maxillo-Facial Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department of Periodontology and Operative Dentistry, University Medical
Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Center of Electron Microscopy, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany.
(4)Department of Periodontology, Laboratory of Oral Microbiology, University of
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

Periodontitis is a prevalent chronic inflammatory disease triggered by a
synergistic and dysbiotic microbiota present in the oral biofilm. This in vitro
study is aimed at evaluating the regulation of cyclooxygenase (COX)2 expression
and production by the periodontopathogen Filifactor alocis in human gingival
fibroblastic (HGF-1) and monocytic (THP-1) cells and also at investigating the
underlying cellular pathway mechanisms. HGF-1 and THP-1 cells were exposed either
to F. alocis or to the proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFα) for 1 and 2 d to examine the COX2 expression by qPCR. COX2 protein levels 
were evaluated by ELISA in F. alocis-stimulated cells. Both types of cells were
also stimulated with a blocking toll-like receptor (TLR)2 antibody or specific
inhibitors against MAPKs. F. alocis significantly (p < 0.05) increased COX2 at
both transcriptional and protein levels in both HGF-1 and THP-1 cells. Moreover, 
the stimulatory effect of F. alocis on COX2 was more pronounced in HGF-1 cells in
comparison to THP-1 cells. F. alocis upregulated the COX2 expression in a
dose-dependent manner in both type cells at 1 d. TNFα also significantly (p <
0.05) increased the COX2 expression in both cells. After preincubation of HGF-1
and THP-1 cells either with a neutralizing anti-TLR2 antibody or with specific
MAPK inhibitors, the F. alocis-upregulated COX2 expression was significantly (p <
0.05) suppressed at 1 d. Our in vitro study provides original evidence that F.
alocis stimulates COX2 production in fibroblastic and monocytic cells through
TLR2 and MAPK mechanisms, suggesting a role of this periodontopathogen in the
etiopathogenesis of periodontitis.

Copyright © 2020 Marjan Nokhbehsaim et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/4185273 
PMCID: PMC7023199
PMID: 32089643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interests regarding the publication of this paper.

