
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Feb 21;21(4). pii: E1488. doi: 10.3390/ijms21041488.

Small Molecule Anion Carriers Correct Abnormal Airway Surface Liquid Properties
in Cystic Fibrosis Airway Epithelia.

Gianotti A(1), Capurro V(1), Delpiano L(1), Mielczarek M(2), García-Valverde
M(2), Carreira-Barral I(2), Ludovico A(3), Fiore M(3), Baroni D(3), Moran O(3),
Quesada R(2), Caci E(1).

Author information: 
(1)UOC Genetica Medica, IRCSS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 16145 Genova, Italy.
(2)Departamento de Química, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Burgos, 09001
Burgos, Spain.
(3)Istituto di Biofisica, Consiglio Nazionale Delle Ricerche (CNR), 16149 Genova,
Italy.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease characterized by the lack of cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein expressed in
epithelial cells. The resulting defective chloride and bicarbonate secretion and 
imbalance of the transepithelial homeostasis lead to abnormal airway surface
liquid (ASL) composition and properties. The reduced ASL volume impairs ciliary
beating with the consequent accumulation of sticky mucus. This situation prevents
the normal mucociliary clearance, favouring the survival and proliferation of
bacteria and contributing to the genesis of CF lung disease. Here, we have
explored the potential of small molecules capable of facilitating the
transmembrane transport of chloride and bicarbonate in order to replace the
defective transport activity elicited by CFTR in CF airway epithelia. Primary
human bronchial epithelial cells obtained from CF and non-CF patients were
differentiated into a mucociliated epithelia in order to assess the effects of
our compounds on some key properties of ASL. The treatment of these functional
models with non-toxic doses of the synthetic anionophores improved the
periciliary fluid composition, reducing the fluid re-absorption, correcting the
ASL pH and reducing the viscosity of the mucus, thus representing promising drug 
candidates for CF therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21041488 
PMCID: PMC7073096
PMID: 32098269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E.C., O.M. and R.Q. are inventors of a patent
application (PCT/EP2019/057696) which protects the composition and use of the
compounds described in the present study. The other authors declare no conflict
of interest.

