
1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2020 Feb 25;9(3). pii: E98. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics9030098.

Effective Photodynamic Inactivation of 26 Escherichia coli Strains with Different
Antibiotic Susceptibility Profiles: a Planktonic and Biofilm Study.

Gulías Ò(1), McKenzie G(1), Bayó M(2), Agut M(1), Nonell S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Químic de Sarrià, Universitat Ramon Llull, 08017 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Laboratori d'anàlisis M. Bayó, 08221Terrassa, Spain.

The emergence of multidrug-resistant bacteria is a growing problem and
alternative therapies are being sought to effectively address this issue. The aim
of this study is to assess a range of Escherichia coli strains' susceptibility to
Methylene Blue-mediated antimicrobial photodynamic therapy and determine if this 
is affected by their antibiotic-resistance profile. Two reference and twenty-four
uropathogenic clinical E. coli strains were used in this study. All were tested
in vitro for antimicrobial susceptibility against sixteen antibiotics. Strains
underwent photodynamic treatments using the photosensitizer Methylene Blue with
red light and tested in both planktonic and biofilm state. It was found that
reference strain ATCC 25922 was susceptible to all tested antibiotics whereas
reference strain ATCC 35218 showed resistance only to Ampicillin. With the
exception of strains number 16 and 22, all of the isolated strains were
multidrug-resistant according to the criteria established by the European Centre 
for Disease Prevention and Control and the Centre for Disease Control and
Prevention, where acquired non-susceptibility to at least one agent in three or
more antimicrobial categories is outlined. Photodynamic therapy induced more than
3 log10 colony-forming units' reduction to all strains in planktonic state.
Whereas when tested in biofilm state, two and a half times the original dose of
methylene blue was necessary to cause a 3 log10 antimicrobial effect. There were 
statistically significant differences in susceptibility among the strains tested 
in both the planktonic and biofilm experiments. Nevertheless, antimicrobial
photodynamic therapy could inactivate all multidrug-resistant strains in the
planktonic and biofilm state.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics9030098 
PMCID: PMC7175106
PMID: 32106485 

