
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2020 May;100:117-125. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.02.052.
Epub 2020 Feb 25.

The effect of dietary cecropin AD on intestinal health, immune response and
disease resistance of juvenile turbot (Scophthalmus maximus L.).

Dai J(1), Zheng J(1), Ou W(1), Xu W(1), Ai Q(1), Zhang W(1), Niu J(2), Zhang
Y(3), Mai K(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Aquaculture Nutrition and Feed (Ministry of
Agriculture), The Key Laboratory of Mariculture (Ministry of Education), Ocean
University of China, Qingdao, 266003, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Institute of Aquatic Economic Animal,
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for Aquatic Economic Animals, School of Life
Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510275, China.
(3)The Key Laboratory of Aquaculture Nutrition and Feed (Ministry of
Agriculture), The Key Laboratory of Mariculture (Ministry of Education), Ocean
University of China, Qingdao, 266003, China; Laboratory for Marine Fisheries
Science and Food Production Processes, Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine
Science and Technology, Qingdao, 266237, China. Electronic address:
yanjiaozhang@ouc.edu.cn.
(4)The Key Laboratory of Aquaculture Nutrition and Feed (Ministry of
Agriculture), The Key Laboratory of Mariculture (Ministry of Education), Ocean
University of China, Qingdao, 266003, China; Laboratory for Marine Fisheries
Science and Food Production Processes, Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine
Science and Technology, Qingdao, 266237, China.

Cecropin AD (CAD) is a commercial cationic antimicrobial peptide that has been
seldom studied in marine fish. This study investigated the effects of dietary CAD
on intestinal health, immune response, disease resistance, and growth performance
of turbot. A diet using fishmeal and plant protein as the main protein resources 
was used as the control (crude protein 53%, crude lipid 12%). CAD was
supplemented into the control diet at the level of 250, 500, 750, and
1000 mg kg-1 to formulate four experimental diets, C1, C2, C3, and C4,
respectively. No significant difference was observed in fish growth performance, 
feed utilization efficiency and whole-body composition among all groups. Dietary 
CAD significantly increased the activity of lysozyme and complement component 3
level in both serum and distal intestine (DI), as well as the immunoglobulin M
content in DI. The gene expression of immune cytokines such as IFN-γ, IL-1β, and 
chemokine SmCCL19, and the goblet cell number in DI were also significantly
increased by dietary CAD supplementation. Compared with the control group, the
microbiota analysis indicated group C4 showed significantly decreased
α-diversity, obvious alternation in dominant bacteria composition at phylum
level, different clustering, and significantly decreased relative abundance of
Lactobacillus. Besides, the relative abundance of Bacteroides was significantly
decreased in groups C1, C3, and C4. In addition, the lowest mortality of turbot
challenged with Edwardsiella tarda was observed in fish fed diets C2 and C3. In
conclusion, moderate levels of CAD in diet of turbot improved the intestinal
immune response without disrupting the intestinal bacterial community, and
enhanced the disease resistance. However, dietary CAD at 1000 mg kg-1 greatly
affected the intestinal bacterial composition and showed potentially inhibitory
effects towards Lactobacillus.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.02.052 
PMID: 32109613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

