
1. Toxins (Basel). 2020 Feb 25;12(3). pii: E142. doi: 10.3390/toxins12030142.

Assessment of the Effect of Satureja montana and Origanum virens Essential Oils
on Aspergillus flavus Growth and Aflatoxin Production at Different Water
Activities.

García-Díaz M(1), Gil-Serna J(1), Patiño B(1), García-Cela E(2)(3), Magan N(2),
Medina Á(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physiology, and Microbiology, Faculty of Biology,
University Complutense of Madrid, Jose Antonio Novais 12, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Applied Mycology Group, Cranfield Soil and AgriFood Institute, Cranfield
University, Bedford MK43 0AL, UK.
(3)Biological and Environmental Sciences, School of Life and Medical Sciences,
University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield AL109AB, UK.

Aflatoxin contamination of foodstuffs poses a serious risk to food security, and 
it is essential to search for new control methods to prevent these toxins
entering the food chain. Several essential oils are able to reduce the growth and
mycotoxin biosynthesis of toxigenic species, although their efficiency is
strongly influenced by the environmental conditions. In this work, the
effectiveness of Satureja montana and Origanum virens essential oils to control
Aspergillus flavus growth was evaluated under three water activity levels (0.94, 
0.96 and 0.98 aw) using a Bioscreen C, a rapid in vitro spectrophotometric
technique. The aflatoxin concentrations at all conditions tested were determined 
by HPLC-FLD. Aspergillus flavus growth was delayed by both essential oil
treatments. However, only S. montana essential oil was able to significantly
affect aflatoxin production, although the inhibition percentages widely differed 
among water activities. The most significant reduction was observed at 0.96 aw,
which is coincident with the conditions in which A. flavus reached the highest
levels of aflatoxin production. On the contrary, the treatment with S. montana
essential oil was not effective in significantly reducing aflatoxin production at
0.94 aw. Therefore, it is important to study the interaction of the new control
compounds with environmental factors before their application in food matrices,
and in vitro ecophysiological studies are a good option since they provide
accurate and rapid results.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12030142 
PMCID: PMC7150974
PMID: 32106532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

