
1. Front Physiol. 2020 Feb 13;11:20. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00020. eCollection
2020.

A Proteomic View of the Cross-Talk Between Early Intestinal Microbiota and
Poultry Immune System.

Rodrigues DR(1), Wilson KM(1), Trombetta M(1), Briggs WN(1), Duff AF(1), Chasser 
KM(1), Bottje WG(2), Bielke L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United
States.
(2)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR,
United States.

Proteomics has been used to investigate cross-talk between the intestinal
microbiome and host biological processes. In this study, an in ovo technique and 
a proteomics approach was used to address how early bacterial colonization in the
gastrointestinal tract (GIT) could modulate inflammatory and immune responses in 
young broilers. Embryos at 18 embryogenic days were inoculated with saline (S),
102 CFU of Citrobacter freundii (CF), Citrobacter species (C2), or lactic acid
bacteria mixture (L) into the amnion. At 10 days posthatch, ileum samples from 12
birds per treatment were selected for tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Our
further findings indicated that treatment-specific influences on early GIT
microbiota resulted in different immune responses in mature broilers. Predicted
functional analyses revealed activation of inflammation pathways in broilers
treated in ovo with L and CF. Exposure to L enhanced functional annotation
related to activation, trafficking of immune cells, and skeletal growth
based-network, while CF inhibited biological functions associated with immune
cell migration and inflammatory response. These results highlighted that proper
immune function was dependent on specific GIT microbiota profiles, in which
early-life exposure to L-based probiotic may have modulated the immune functions,
whereas neonatal colonization of Enterobacteriaceae strains may have led to
immune dysregulation associated with chronic inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2020 Rodrigues, Wilson, Trombetta, Briggs, Duff, Chasser, Bottje and 
Bielke.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00020 
PMCID: PMC7031415
PMID: 32116744 

