
1. Poult Sci. 2020 Mar;99(3):1254-1266. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2019.10.017. Epub 2020
Jan 30.

Impact of in ovo administered pioneer colonizers on intestinal proteome on day of
hatch.

Wilson KM(1), Rodrigues DR(1), Briggs WN(1), Duff AF(1), Chasser KM(1), Bottje
WG(2), Bielke LR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
(2)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR.
(3)Department of Animal Science, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
Electronic address: bielke.1@osu.edu.

Pioneer colonization of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) by bacteria is thought
to have major influence on neonatal tissue development. Previous studies have
shown in ovo inoculation of embryos with saline (S), species of Citrobacter (C,
C2), or lactic acid bacteria (L) resulted in an altered microbiome on day of the 
hatch (DOH). The present study investigated GIT proteomic changes at DOH in
relation to different inoculations. Embryos were inoculated in ovo with S or
∼102 cfu of C, C2, or L at 18 embryonic days. On DOH, the GIT was collected, and 
tissue proteins were extracted for analysis via tandem mass spectrometry. A total
of 493 proteins were identified for differential comparison with S at P ≤ 0.10.
Different levels were noted in 107, 39, and 78 proteins in C, C2, and L groups,
respectively, which were uploaded to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to determine
canonical pathways and biological functions related to these changes. Three
members of the cytokine family (interleukin [IL]-1β, IL6, and Oncostatin M) were 
predicted to be activated in C2, indicated with Z-score ≥ 1.50, which suggested
an overall proinflammatory GIT condition. This was consistent with the activation
of the acute-phase response signaling pathway seen exclusively in C2
(Z-score = 2.00, P < 0.01). However, activation (Z-score = 2.00) of IL-13,
upregulation of peroxiredoxin-1 and superoxide dismutase 1, in addition to
activation of nitric oxide signaling in the cardiovascular system of the L
treatment may predict a state of increased antioxidant capacity and decreased
inflammatory status. The nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2
(NRF2)-mediated oxidative stress response (Z-score = 2.00, P < 0.01) was
predicted to be upregulated in C which suggested that chicks were in an
inflammatory state and associated oxidative stress, but the impact of these
pathways differed from that of C2. These changes in the proteome suggest that
pioneer colonizing microbiota may have a strong impact on pathways associated
with GIT immune and cellular development.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2019.10.017 
PMCID: PMC7587751
PMID: 32111303  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

