
1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2020 Apr 15;30(8):127065. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2020.127065. 
Epub 2020 Feb 26.

Synthesis and in-vitro anti-cancer evaluations of multi-methoxylated asymmetrical
diarylpentanoids as intrinsic apoptosis inducer against colorectal cancer.

Leong SW(1), Chia SL(2), Abas F(3), Yusoff K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor Darul Ehsan,
Malaysia. Electronic address: frederick_leong@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor Darul Ehsan,
Malaysia; Institute of Bioscience, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, 
Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia. Electronic address: suetlin@upm.edu.my.
(3)Institute of Bioscience, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang,
Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia; Department of Food Science, Faculty of Food
Science and Technology, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor,
Malaysia.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor Darul Ehsan,
Malaysia; Malaysia Genome Institute (MGI), National Institute of Biotechnology
Malaysia (NIBM), Jalan Bangi, 43000 Kajang, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia.

In the present study, a series of nine stable 3,4,5-methoxylphenyl-containing
asymmetrical diarylpentanoids, derivatives of curcuminoids, have been
synthesized, characterized and evaluated for their in-vitro anti-cancer potential
against a panel of BRAF- and KRAS-mutated colorectal cancer cell lines including 
T84, LoVo and SW620, HT29, RKO and NCI-H508, respectively. Structure-activity
relationship study on cytotoxicity of tested compounds suggested that the
presence of meta-hydroxyl and adjacent dimethoxyl groups are crucial for enhanced
cytotoxicity of diarylpentanoids. Among the evaluated analogs, 8 has been
identified as the lead compound due to its highest chemotherapeutic index of 9.9 
and nano molar scale cytotoxicity against SW620 and RKO. Colonies formation and
cell cycle analyses on 8-treated RKO cells showed that 8 exhibits strong
anti-proliferative activity by inducing G2/M-phase cell arrest. Subsequent flow
cytometry based annexin-V and DCFHDA studies suggested that 8 could induce
apoptosis through intracellular ROS-dependent pathway. Further Western blot
studies confirmed that 8 has induced intrinsic apoptosis in RKO cells through the
up-regulations of Bad and Bax pro-apoptotic proteins and down-regulations of
Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL pro-survival proteins. In all, the present results suggest that 
8 could be a potent lead which deserves further modification and investigation in
the development of small molecule-based anti-colorectal cancer agents.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2020.127065 
PMID: 32127259 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

