
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Feb 27;8(3). pii: E337. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8030337.

Seasonal Changes in Microbial Dissolved Organic Sulfur Transformations in Coastal
Waters.

Dixon JL(1), Hopkins FE(1), Stephens JA(1), Schäfer H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, West Hoe, Plymouth, Devon PL1 3DH,
UK.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry CV4
7AL, UK.

The marine trace gas dimethylsulfide (DMS) is the single most important biogenic 
source of atmospheric sulfur, accounting for up to 80% of global biogenic sulfur 
emissions. Approximately 300 million tons of DMS are produced annually, but the
majority is degraded by microbes in seawater. The DMS precursor
dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) and oxidation product dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO)
are also important organic sulfur reservoirs. However, the marine sinks of
dissolved DMSO remain unknown. We used a novel combination of stable and
radiotracers to determine seasonal changes in multiple dissolved organic sulfur
transformation rates to ascertain whether microbial uptake of dissolved DMSO was 
a significant loss pathway. Surface concentrations of DMS ranged from 0.5 to 17.0
nM with biological consumption rates between 2.4 and 40.8 nM·d-1. DMS produced
from the reduction of DMSO was not a significant process. Surface concentrations 
of total DMSO ranged from 2.3 to 102 nM with biological consumption of dissolved 
DMSO between 2.9 and 111 nM·d-1. Comparisons between 14C2-DMSO assimilation and
dissimilation rates suggest that the majority of dissolved DMSO was respired
(>94%). Radiotracer microbial consumption rates suggest that dissimilation of
dissolved DMSO to CO2 can be a significant loss pathway in coastal waters,
illustrating the significance of bacteria in controlling organic sulfur seawater 
concentrations.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8030337 
PMCID: PMC7143303
PMID: 32120978 

