
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;12(3):174-184. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evaa039.

Evolutionary Analysis of the Zinc Finger and Homeoboxes Family of Proteins
Identifies Multiple Conserved Domains and a Common Early Chordate Ancestor.

Nail AN(1), Smith JJ(2)(3), Peterson ML(1)(3), Spear BT(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky.
(3)Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky.

The Zinc Fingers and Homeoboxes (Zhx) proteins, Zhx1, Zhx2, and Zhx3, comprise a 
small family of proteins containing two amino-terminal C2-H2 zinc fingers and
four or five carboxy-terminal homeodomains. These multiple homeodomains make Zhx 
proteins unusual because the majority of homeodomain-containing proteins contain 
a single homeodomain. Studies in cultured cells and mice suggest that Zhx
proteins can function as positive or negative transcriptional regulators. Zhx2
regulates numerous hepatic genes, and all three Zhx proteins have been implicated
in different cancers. Because Zhx proteins contain multiple predicted
homeodomains, are associated with interesting physiological traits, and seem to
be only present in the vertebrate lineage, we investigated the evolutionary
history of this small family by comparing Zhx homologs from a wide range of
chordates. This analysis indicates that the zinc finger motifs and homeodomains
are highly similar among all Zhx proteins and also identifies additional
Zhx-specific conserved regions, including a 13 amino acid amino-terminal motif
that is nearly identical among all gnathostome Zhx proteins. We found single Zhx 
proteins in the sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus) and in the nonvertebrate
chordates sea squirt (Ciona intestinalis) and lancelet (Branchiostoma floridae); 
these Zhx proteins are most similar to gnathostome Zhx3. Based on our analyses,
we propose that a duplication of the primordial Zhx gene gave rise to Zhx3 and
the precursor to Zhx1 and Zhx2. A subsequent tandem duplication of this precursor
generated Zhx1 and Zhx2 found in gnathostomes.

Â© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evaa039 
PMCID: PMC7144352
PMID: 32125369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

