
1. PLoS Genet. 2020 Mar 6;16(3):e1008524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008524.
eCollection 2020 Mar.

Transcription-replication conflicts as a source of common fragile site
instability caused by BMI1-RNF2 deficiency.

Sanchez A(1), de Vivo A(1), Tonzi P(2), Kim J(1), Huang TT(2), Kee Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, College of
Arts and Sciences, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of 
America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America.

Common fragile sites (CFSs) are breakage-prone genomic loci, and are considered
to be hotspots for genomic rearrangements frequently observed in cancers.
Understanding the underlying mechanisms for CFS instability will lead to better
insight on cancer etiology. Here we show that Polycomb group proteins BMI1 and
RNF2 are suppressors of transcription-replication conflicts (TRCs) and CFS
instability. Cells depleted of BMI1 or RNF2 showed slower replication forks and
elevated fork stalling. These phenotypes are associated with increase occupancy
of RNA Pol II (RNAPII) at CFSs, suggesting that the BMI1-RNF2 complex regulate
RNAPII elongation at these fragile regions. Using proximity ligase assays, we
showed that depleting BMI1 or RNF2 causes increased associations between RNAPII
with EdU-labeled nascent forks and replisomes, suggesting increased TRC
incidences. Increased occupancy of a fork protective factor FANCD2 and R-loop
resolvase RNH1 at CFSs are observed in RNF2 CRISPR-KO cells, which are consistent
with increased transcription-associated replication stress in RNF2-deficient
cells. Depleting FANCD2 or FANCI proteins further increased genomic instability
and cell death of the RNF2-deficient cells, suggesting that in the absence of
RNF2, cells depend on these fork-protective factors for survival. These data
suggest that the Polycomb proteins have non-canonical roles in suppressing TRC
and preserving genomic integrity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008524 
PMCID: PMC7080270
PMID: 32142505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

