
1. Cell. 2020 Mar 5;180(5):847-861.e15. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.018.

Long-Term Programming of CD8 T Cell Immunity by Perinatal Exposure to
Glucocorticoids.

Hong JY(1), Lim J(1), Carvalho F(1), Cho JY(1), Vaidyanathan B(1), Yu S(1),
Annicelli C(1), Ip WKE(1), Medzhitov R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.
(2)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA.
Electronic address: ruslan.medzhitov@yale.edu.

Comment in
    Cell. 2020 Mar 5;180(5):820-821.
    Immunity. 2020 Apr 14;52(4):580-582.

Early life environmental exposure, particularly during perinatal period, can have
a life-long impact on organismal development and physiology. The biological
rationale for this phenomenon is to promote physiological adaptations to the
anticipated environment based on early life experience. However, perinatal
exposure to adverse environments can also be associated with adult-onset
disorders. Multiple environmental stressors induce glucocorticoids, which
prompted us to investigate their role in developmental programming. Here, we
report that perinatal glucocorticoid exposure had long-term consequences and
resulted in diminished CD8 T cell response in adulthood and impaired control of
tumor growth and bacterial infection. We found that perinatal glucocorticoid
exposure resulted in persistent alteration of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
(HPA) axis. Consequently, the level of the hormone in adults was significantly
reduced, resulting in decreased CD8 T cell function. Our study thus demonstrates 
that perinatal stress can have long-term consequences on CD8 T cell immunity by
altering HPA axis activity.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.018 
PMCID: PMC7399609
PMID: 32142678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests All authors declare no
competing interests. B.V. is currently an employee of EMD Serono.

