
1. Fitoterapia. 2020 Jun;143:104532. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2020.104532. Epub 2020
Mar 7.

New bioactive secondary metabolites from the Anoectochilus roxburghii endophytic 
fungus Aspergillus versicolor.

Deng M(1), Liu Y(1), Huang Y(1), Yin X(2), Zhou Y(1), Duan Y(1), Xie S(1), Guo
Y(1), Qiao Y(1), Shi Z(1), Tao L(1), Cao Y(1), Qi C(1), Zhang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Natural Medicinal Chemistry and Resource Evaluation,
School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei Province, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Natural Medicines, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, People's Republic of China.
(3)Hubei Key Laboratory of Natural Medicinal Chemistry and Resource Evaluation,
School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei Province, People's Republic of China. Electronic 
address: zhangyh@mails.tjmu.edu.cn.

Six new compounds, including two new isochromane lactones, versicoisochromanes A 
and B (1 and 2), two new benzolactones, versicobenzos A and B (3 and 4), one
furancarboxylic derivate, asperfuran A (6) and one ergosterol-type steroid,
asperergoster A (7), along with five known steroids (8-12), were isolated from
the Anoectochilus roxburghii endophytic fungus Aspergillus versicolor. The
structures of these new compounds were determined by extensive spectroscopic
techniques and electronic circular dichroism (ECD) calculations. It is notable
that the new compound 7 exhibited obvious IL-1β, NO and TNF-α inhibitory activity
in LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 macrophages, with IC50 values of 35.5, 33.9 and
31.3 μM, respectively. Furthermore, compounds 7 and 8 displayed potential
inhibitory effects on murine splenocytes proliferation stimulated by
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), meanwhile suppress the
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) irritated murine splenocytes proliferation.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fitote.2020.104532 
PMID: 32151636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

