
1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2020 May 1;318(5):L953-L964. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00403.2019. Epub 2020 Mar 11.

Activation of a nerve injury transcriptional signature in airway-innervating
sensory neurons after lipopolysaccharide-induced lung inflammation.

Kaelberer MM(1), Caceres AI(2), Jordt SE(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham,
North Carolina.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine. Durham, North Carolina.
(4)Integrated Toxicology and Environmental Health Program (ITEHP), Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina.

The lungs and the immune and nervous systems functionally interact to respond to 
respiratory environmental exposures and infections. The lungs are innervated by
vagal sensory neurons of the jugular and nodose ganglia, fused together in
smaller mammals as the jugular-nodose complex (JNC). Whereas the JNC shares
properties with the other sensory ganglia, the trigeminal (TG) and dorsal root
ganglia (DRG), these sensory structures express differential sets of genes that
reflect their unique functionalities. Here, we used RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) in
mice to identify the differential transcriptomes of the three sensory ganglia
types. Using a fluorescent retrograde tracer and fluorescence-activated cell
sorting, we isolated a defined population of airway-innervating JNC neurons and
determined their differential transcriptional map after pulmonary exposure to
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a major mediator of acute lung injury (ALI) and acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) after infection with gram-negative bacteria 
or inhalation of organic dust. JNC neurons activated an injury response program, 
leading to increased expression of gene products such as the G protein-coupled
receptor Cckbr, inducing functional changes in neuronal sensitivity to peptides, 
and Gpr151, also rapidly induced upon neuropathic nerve injury in pain models.
Unique JNC-specific transcripts, present at only minimal levels in TG, DRG, and
other organs, were identified. These included TMC3, encoding for a putative
mechanosensor, and urotensin 2B, a hypertensive peptide. These findings highlight
the unique properties of the JNC and reveal that ALI/ARDS rapidly induces a nerve
injury-related state, changing vagal excitability.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00403.2019 
PMCID: PMC7272742 [Available on 2021-05-01]
PMID: 32159971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

