
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Feb 21;11:108. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00108. eCollection
2020.

Genome-Based Analysis of Extended-Spectrum β-Lactamase-Producing Escherichia coli
in the Aquatic Environment and Nile Perch (Lates niloticus) of Lake Victoria,
Tanzania.

Baniga Z(1)(2), Hounmanou YMG(3), Kudirkiene E(3), Kusiluka LJM(1)(4), Mdegela
RH(1), Dalsgaard A(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Public Health, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Sokoine University of Agriculture, Morogoro,
Tanzania.
(2)Department of Fisheries Development, National Fish Quality Control
Laboratory-Nyegezi, Mwanza, Tanzania.
(3)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Mzumbe University, Mzumbe, Tanzania.
(5)School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore, Singapore.

Extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing bacteria constitute an emerging
global health issue with food products being vehicles of transmission and the
aquatic environments serving as potential reservoirs. This study aimed to
characterize ESBL-producing Escherichia coli in Nile perch and water from Lake
Victoria in Tanzania. A total of 180 samples of Nile perch and 60 water samples
were screened for ESBL-producing E. coli on MacConkey agar supplemented with 2
μg/ml of cefotaxime and confirmed by bla CTX-M and bla TEM PCR. Antimicrobial
resistance was determined by the disk diffusion method, and the ESBL-producing
isolates were whole genome sequencing (WGS). ESBL-producing E. coli were detected
in eight of the 180 analyzed Nile perch samples, and only one water sample was
positive (1.7%, n = 60). Isolates were resistant to sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim
(100%), ampicillin/cloxacillin (100%), erythromycin 72.7% (8/11), tetracycline
90.9% (10/11), and nalidixic acid 63.6% (7/11). This mostly corroborates the
resistance genes that they carried for sulfonamides (sul1 and sul2), trimethoprim
(dfrA and dfrB), aminoglycosides [aac(3)-IId, strA, and strB], tetracycline
[tet(B) and tet(D)], and fluoroquinolones (qepA4). They harbored plasmid replicon
types IncF, IncX, IncQ, and Col and carried bla CTX-M- 15 and bla TEM- 1 B genes 
generally found on the same contigs as the IncF plasmid replicon. Although
epidemiologically unrelated, the strains formed three separate sequence
type-phylogroup-serotype-specific clusters: C1, C2, and C3. Cluster C1 included
five strains (3 to 13 SNPs) belonging to ST167, phylogroup A, and serotype
O9:H21; the two C2 strains (11 SNPs) belong to ST156, phylogroup B1, and serotype
ONT:H28; and C3 was made up of four strains (SNPs ranged from 4 to 17) of ST636, 
phylogroup B2, and serotype O45:H7. The common virulence gene gad was reported in
all strains. In addition, strains in C2 and C3 possessed iss, lpfA, and nfaE
virulence genes, and the vat gene was found only in C3. The present study reports
the occurrence of multidrug-resistant ESBL-producing E. coli carrying
plasmid-mediated ESBL genes in offshore water and Nile perch in Lake Victoria.
Strains formed three clonal clusters of unknown origin. This study reveals that
the Lake may serve as reservoir for ESBL-producing bacteria that can be
transmitted by fish as a food chain hazard of One-Health concern.

Copyright © 2020 Baniga, Hounmanou, Kudirkiene, Kusiluka, Mdegela and Dalsgaard.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00108 
PMCID: PMC7046833
PMID: 32153519 

