
1. J Plast Surg Hand Surg. 2020 Jun;54(3):182-186. doi:
10.1080/2000656X.2020.1738240. Epub 2020 Mar 12.

Impact of microbial findings on plastic reconstructive surgery outcomes in
patients with deep sternal wound infection after cardiac surgery.

Arsalan-Werner A(1), Dick L(1), Arsalan M(2), Wölfle O(3), Walther T(2),
Sauerbier M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Plastic, Hand and Reconstructive Surgery, Hand Trauma Center
(FESSH), BG Trauma Center Frankfurt am Main, Academic Hospital of the Goethe
University Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Goethe University Frankfurt
am Main, Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Department for Plastic, Hand and Reconstructive Surgery, Main-Taunus Hospitals
GmbH, Bad Soden, Germany.

Deep sternal wound infection (DSWI) is a life threatening complication after
cardiac surgery. In severe cases, flaps are needed to cover the wound. However,
it is controversial if an aseptic environment is necessary at the time of wound
closure. This is a retrospective study of 73 patients with DSWI treated by
debridement and local or free flap from June 2008 until December 2017. The
influence of positive microbiological findings at the time of plastic
reconstructive surgery on reoperation rate and length of in-hospital stay was
analyzed. Microbiological exams revealed positive results in 47 (64.4%) and no
results in 26 patients. Reoperation had to be performed in 21.3% (positive
cultures) versus 15.4% (p = .54), mean in hospital stay was 24.1 days (positive
cultures) versus 21.8 days (p = .39) and in-hospital mortality was 6.4% (positive
cultures) versus 7.7% (p = .83). Positive microbial findings at the time of
plastic reconstructive surgery in patients with DSWI are not associated with a
higher reoperation or mortality rate or a longer in-hospital stay. Repeated
debridement and vacuum-assisted therapy to achieve negative microbial results
might not be necessary in the treatment of these patients.Key messagesPositive
microbial findings at the time of plastic reconstructive surgery in patients with
deep sternal wound infection seems not to be associated with a higher reoperation
or mortality rate or a longer in-hospital stay.The influence of positive
microbiological findings at the time of plastic reconstructive surgery on
reoperation rate and length of in-hospital stay was analyzed in 73 patients with 
deep sternal wound infection.Microbiological exams revealed positive results in
47 (64.4%) and no results in 26 patients. Reoperation had to be performed in
21.3% (positive cultures) versus 15.4% (p = .54), mean in hospital stay was 24.1 
days (positive cultures) versus 21.8 days (p = .39) and in-hospital mortality was
6.4% (positive cultures) versus 7.7% (p = .83).

DOI: 10.1080/2000656X.2020.1738240 
PMID: 32162994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

