
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2020 May 14;525(4):948-953. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.03.012. Epub 2020 Mar 12.

SulA is able to block cell division in Escherichia coli by a mechanism different 
from sequestration.

Vedyaykin A(1), Rumyantseva N(2), Khodorkovskii M(3), Vishnyakov I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Peter the Great St.Petersburg Polytechnic University, Polytechnicheskaya 29,
Saint-Petersburg, 195251, Russia; Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Tikhoretsky ave. 4, Saint Petersburg, 194064, Russia. Electronic
address: misterkotlin@gmail.com.
(2)Peter the Great St.Petersburg Polytechnic University, Polytechnicheskaya 29,
Saint-Petersburg, 195251, Russia. Electronic address: rumyanatasha@yandex.ru.
(3)Peter the Great St.Petersburg Polytechnic University, Polytechnicheskaya 29,
Saint-Petersburg, 195251, Russia. Electronic address: khodorkovskii@gmail.com.
(4)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Tikhoretsky ave. 4, Saint 
Petersburg, 194064, Russia. Electronic address: innvish@gmail.com.

The SOS response is considered to be an extremely important feature of bacterial 
cells. It helps them to survive bad times, including helping to develop
resistance to antibiotics. The SOS response blocks the cell division. For
Escherichia coli it is well known that the SulA protein directly interacts with
FtsZ - a key division protein. Now it is believed that fission blocking is based 
on FtsZ sequestration by the SulA protein, which leads to decrease in effective
concentration of FtsZ in the cell below a critical value, which in vitro leads to
dismantling of FtsZ polymers. In this work, we demonstrate that in order to block
the division of E. coli, it is sufficient to have a relatively small amount of
SulA in the cell. Moreover, the analysis of structures formed by FtsZ in E. coli 
cells under the conditions of SulA protein expression or the SOS response showed 
that there is no complete disassembly of FtsZ polymers, although Z-rings indeed
are not formed. The results of the work indicate that the well-known
sequestration mechanism is not comprehensive to explain blocking of the division 
process by SulA in vivo.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.03.012 
PMID: 32173527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

