
1. Bioorg Chem. 2020 May;98:103727. doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2020.103727. Epub 2020 Mar
5.

The insertion of functional groups in organic selenium compounds promote changes 
in mitochondrial parameters and raise the antibacterial activity.

Stefanello ST(1), Mizdal CR(2), Gonçalves DF(3), Hartmann DD(3), Dobrachinski
F(3), de Carvalho NR(3), Salman SM(4), Sauer AC(5), Dornelles L(5), de Campos
MMA(2), Soares FAA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, Centro de Ciências Naturais e
Exatas, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria CEP 97105-900, Brazil.
Electronic address: silviotstefanello@hotmail.com.
(2)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade
Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria CEP 97105-900, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, Centro de Ciências Naturais e
Exatas, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria CEP 97105-900, Brazil.
(4)Departament of Chemistry, Islamia College University Peshawar, Peshawar,
Pakistan.
(5)Departamento de Química, Centro de Ciências Naturais e Exatas, Universidade
Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria CEP 97105-900, Brazil.

Organic selenium compounds are widely associated with numerous pharmacological
properties. However, selenium compounds, such as Ebselen (Ebs) and Diphenyl
Diselenide (DPDS), could interact with mitochondrial respiratory complexes,
especially with thiol groups. The present study evaluated whether the insertion
of functional groups, o-methoxy, and p-methyl on organic selenium compounds
promotes changes in mitochondrial functioning parameters and whether this is
related to antibacterial activity. Here we tested some in vitro parameters after 
the exposure of mitochondria to different concentrations of β-selenoamines
1-phenyl-3-(p-tolylselanyl)propan-2-amine (C1) and
1-(2-methoxyphenylselanyl)-3-phenylpropan-2-amine (C2) and analogs of DPDS
1,2-bis(2-methoxyphenyl)diselenide (C3) and 1,2-bisp-tolyldiselenide (C4). We
also evaluated the antibacterial activity of β-selenoamines and diselenides
against Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli. Our
results showed that o-methoxy insertion increased the antioxidant properties,
without affecting the mitochondrial membrane potential. The compounds with a
p-methyl insertion affected the mitochondrial membrane potential and
significantly decreased the State III respiration and RCR. Besides, the p-methyl 
compounds presented antibacterial activity at lower concentrations than those
shown in o-methoxy, precisely by the same mechanism that promotes damage to thiol
groups and better absorption in gram-positive bacteria due to their relationship 
with cell wall constituents. Finally, our study confirms that structural
modifications in organic selenium compounds provide changes in mitochondrial
functioning but also raise their antibacterial effect. This strategy can be used 
as a target for the development of new enough potent antibacterial to restrict
the advance of resistant bacterial infections.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2020.103727 
PMID: 32179285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

