
1. Mar Drugs. 2020 Mar 12;18(3). pii: E159. doi: 10.3390/md18030159.

Types and Distribution of Bioactive Polyunsaturated Aldehydes in a Gradient from 
Mesotrophic to Oligotrophic Waters in the Alborán Sea (Western Mediterranean).

Bartual A(1)(2), Hernanz-Torrijos M(1)(2), Sala I(1)(2), Ortega MJ(1),
González-García C(3), Bolado-Penagos M(1)(2), López-Urrutia A(4), Romero-Martínez
L(2), Lubián LM(3), Bruno M(1)(2), Echevarría F(1)(2), García CM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Ciencias del Mar y Ambientales, Universidad de Cádiz, Puerto Real,
11510 Cádiz, Spain.
(2)Instituto Universitario de Investigaciones Marinas (INMAR), Campus de
Excelencia Internacional del Mar (CEI-MAR), Universidad de Cádiz, Puerto Real,
11510 Cádiz, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Ecología y Gestión Costera, Instituto de Ciencias Marinas de
Andalucía (ICMAN-CSIC), Puerto Real, 11510 Cádiz, Spain.
(4)Instituto Español de Oceanografía (IEO), Centro Oceanográfico de Gijón, 33212 
Gijón, Asturias, Spain.

Polyunsaturated aldehydes (PUAs) are bioactive molecules suggested as chemical
defenses and infochemicals. In marine coastal habitats, diatoms reach high PUA
production levels during bloom episodes. Two fractions of PUA can usually be
analyzed: pPUA obtained via artificial breakage of collected phytoplankton cells 
and dissolved PUA already released to the environment (dPUA). In nature, resource
supply arises as a main environmental controlling factor of PUA production. In
this work, we monitored the vertical distribution and daily variation of pPUA
associated with large-size phytoplankton and dPUA, at three sites located in the 
Alborán Sea from mesotrophic to oligotrophic waters. The results corroborate the 
presence of large-size PUA producers in oligotrophic and mesotrophic waters with 
a significant (58%-85%) diatom biomass. In addition to diatoms, significant
correlations between pPUA production and dinoflagellate and silicoflagellate
abundance were observed. 2E,4E/Z-Heptadienal was the most abundant aldehyde at
the three sites with higher values (17.1 fg·cell-1) at the most oligotrophic
site. 2E,4E/Z-Decadienal was the least abundant aldehyde, decreasing toward the
oligotrophic site. For the first time, we describe the daily fluctuation of pPUA 
attributable to cellular physiological state and not exclusively to taxonomical
composition. Our results demonstrate the persistence of threshold levels of dPUA 
deep in the water column, as well as the different chromatographic profiles of
dPUA compared with pPUA. We propose different isomerization processes that alter 
the chemical structure of the released PUAs with unknown effects on their
stability, biological function, and potential bioactivity.

DOI: 10.3390/md18030159 
PMCID: PMC7143741
PMID: 32178402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

