
1. J Gen Appl Microbiol. 2020 Jun 17;66(2):121-128. doi: 10.2323/jgam.2020.01.004.
Epub 2020 Mar 13.

Overexpression of the response regulator rpaA causes an impaired cell division in
the Cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803.

Kizawa A(1), Osanai T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, School of Agriculture, Meiji University.

In photosynthetic microorganisms, cell cycle progression depends on day and night
cycles; however, how cell division is regulated in response to these
environmental changes is poorly understood. RpaA has been implicated in the
signal output from both circadian clocks and light/dark conditions in the
unicellular spherical-celled cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. In the
present study, we investigated the involvement of a two-component response
regulator RpaA in cell division regulation. Firstly, we examined the effects of
rpaA overexpression on cell morphology and the expression levels of cell division
genes. We observed an increase in the volume of non-dividing cells and a high
proportion of dividing cells in rpaA-overexpressing strains by light microscopy. 
The expression levels of selected cell division-related genes were higher in the 
rpaA-overexpressing strain than in the wild type, including minD of the Min
system; cdv3 and zipN, which encode two divisome components; and murB, murC, and 
pbp2, which are involved in peptidoglycan (PG) synthesis. Moreover, in the
rpaA-overexpressing strain, the outer membrane and cell wall PG layer were not
smooth, and the outer membrane was not clearly visible by transmission electron
microscopy. These results demonstrated that rpaA overexpression causes an
impaired cell division, which is accompanied by transcriptional activation of
cell division genes and morphological changes in the PG layer and outer membrane.

DOI: 10.2323/jgam.2020.01.004 
PMID: 32173680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

