
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 May;104(9):3745-3756. doi:
10.1007/s00253-020-10531-0. Epub 2020 Mar 13.

A re-evaluation of diastatic Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains and their role in
brewing.

Krogerus K(1), Gibson B(2).

Author information: 
(1)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd, Tietotie 2, P.O. Box 1000,
FI-02044 VTT, Espoo, Finland. kristoffer.krogerus@gmail.com.
(2)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd, Tietotie 2, P.O. Box 1000,
FI-02044 VTT, Espoo, Finland.

Diastatic strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae possess the unique ability to
hydrolyze and ferment long-chain oligosaccharides like dextrin and starch. They
have long been regarded as important spoilage microbes in beer, but recent
studies have inspired a re-evaluation of the significance of the group. Rather
than being merely wild-yeast contaminants, they are highly specialized,
domesticated yeasts belonging to a major brewing yeast lineage. In fact, many
diastatic strains have unknowingly been used as production strains for decades.
These yeasts are used in the production of traditional beer styles, like saison, 
but also show potential for creation of new beers with novel chemical and
physical properties. Herein, we review results of the most recent studies and
provide a detailed account of the structure, regulation, and functional role of
the glucoamylase-encoding STA1 gene in relation to brewing and other fermentation
industries. The state of the art in detecting diastatic yeast in the brewery is
also summarized. In summary, these latest results highlight that having diastatic
S. cerevisiae in your brewery is not necessarily a bad thing. KEY POINTS:
•Diastatic S. cerevisiae strains are important spoilage microbes in brewery
fermentations. •These strains belong to the 'Beer 2' or 'Mosaic beer' brewing
yeast lineage. •Diastatic strains have unknowingly been used as production
strains in breweries. •The STA1-encoded glucoamylase enables efficient
maltotriose use.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-10531-0 
PMCID: PMC7162825
PMID: 32170387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

