
1. J Fish Dis. 2020 May;43(5):561-570. doi: 10.1111/jfd.13156. Epub 2020 Mar 20.

Zebrafish (Danio rerio) as an animal model for bath infection by Flavobacterium
psychrophilum.

Avendaño-Herrera R(1)(2), Benavides I(3), Espina JA(3), Soto-Comte D(3),
Poblete-Morales M(1), Valdés JA(2)(3), Feijóo CG(3), Reyes AE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Patología de Organismos Acuáticos y Biotecnología Acuícola,
Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andrés Bello, Viña del Mar, Chile.
(2)Interdisciplinary Center for Aquaculture Research (INCAR), Viña del Mar,
Chile.
(3)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida,
Universidad Andrés Bello, Santiago, Chile.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the causative agent of bacterial cold-water
disease and rainbow trout syndrome in freshwater salmonid fish worldwide,
generating injuries and high mortality rates. Despite several studies on this
bacterium, the infection mechanism remains unknown due to limitations in the
employed animal models. In this work, we propose using zebrafish (Danio rerio) as
a model for studying bacterial pathogenicity. To substantiate this proposal,
zebrafish infection by F. psychrophilum strain JIP 02/86 was characterized.
Zebrafish larvae were infected using the bath method, and morphological changes
and innate immune system activation were monitored using transgenic fish.
Salmonid-like infection phenotypes were observed in 4.74% of treated larvae, as
manifested by fin, muscle and caudal peduncle damage. Symptomatic and dead larvae
accounted for 1.35% of all challenged larvae. Interestingly, infected larvae with
no infection phenotypes showed stronger innate immune system activation than
specimens with phenotypes. A failure of function assay for myeloid factor pu.1
resulted in more infected larvae (up to 43.5%), suggesting that low infection
rates by F. psychrophilum would be due to the protective actions of the innate
immune system against this bacterium in zebrafish larvae. Our results support the
use of zebrafish as an infection model for studying F. psychrophilum.
Furthermore, the percentage of infected fish can be modulated by disturbing, to
varying extents, the differentiation of myeloid cells. Using this evidence as a
starting point, different aspects of the infection mechanism of F. psychrophilum 
could be studied in vivo.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.13156 
PMID: 32196708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

