
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2020 Jun;83:106406. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2020.106406. Epub 
2020 Mar 16.

The effect of selenium on the autophagy of macrophage infected by Staphylococcus 
aureus.

Zang H(1), Qian S(1), Li J(1), Zhou Y(1), Zhu Q(1), Cui L(1), Meng X(1), Zhu
G(1), Wang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225009,
China; Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important
Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225009, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225009,
China; Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important
Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225009, China.
Electronic address: wh@yzu.edu.cn.

Selenium can alleviate the inflammatory reaction infected by Staphylococcus
aureus (S. aureus). However, the role of selenium on the autophagy in RAW264.7
macrophages infected by S. aureus has not been reported. The goal of this study
was to clarify the effect of selenium on the autophagy and related inflammatory
pathways (MAPK and NF-κB) in RAW264.7 macrophages infected by S. aureus. RAW264.7
macrophages were co-treated with Na2SeO3 and S. aureus. The expression of related
inflammatory pathways (MAPK and NF-κB) and autophagy-related proteins were
detected by Western blotting. The microtubule-binding protein light chain 3 (LC3)
puncta were measured with immunofluorescence staining. The ultrastructure of
RAW264.7 macrophages infected by S. aureus was detected by transmission electron 
microscope (TEM). And plate counting method was used to detect the proliferation 
of S. aureus in RAW264.7 macrophages. The results showed that the expression
levels of LC3 II increased and the expression levels of p62 decreased after
adding selenium, compared with S. aureus infection group. Compared with S. aureus
infection group, the intracellular LC3 puncta and autophagic vesicles,
autophagosomes, and autolysosomes increased with selenium supplementation. The
number of S. aureus proliferation decreased with addition of selenium, compared
with S. aureus infection group. Selenium could significantly inhibit the
phosphorylation of MAPK and NF-κB signaling pathway key proteins, compared with
S. aureus infection group. In summary, selenium could promote the autophagy in
macrophages infected by S. aureus, alleviate the blockade of autophagic flow,
depress the transcription of MAPK and NF-κB signaling pathways, and inhibit the
proliferation of S. aureus in RAW264.7 macrophages.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2020.106406 
PMID: 32193097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

