
1. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2020 May;110:110657. doi:
10.1016/j.msec.2020.110657. Epub 2020 Jan 25.

UV-photofunctionalization of a biomimetic coating for dental implants
application.

Dini C(1), Nagay BE(1), Cordeiro JM(1), da Cruz NC(2), Rangel EC(2),
Ricomini-Filho AP(3), de Avila ED(4), Barão VAR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontology, Piracicaba Dental School,
University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Av. Limeira, 901, Piracicaba, São Paulo
13414-903, Brazil.
(2)Institute of Science and Technology, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Av.
Três de Março, 511, Sorocaba, São Paulo 18087-180, Brazil.
(3)Department of Physiological Science, Piracicaba Dental School, University of
Campinas (UNICAMP), Av. Limeira, 901, Piracicaba, São Paulo 13414-903, Brazil.
(4)Department of Dental Materials and Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry at
Araraquara, São Paulo State University (UNESP), R. Humaitá, 1680, Araraquara, São
Paulo 14801-903, Brazil.
(5)Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontology, Piracicaba Dental School,
University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Av. Limeira, 901, Piracicaba, São Paulo
13414-903, Brazil. Electronic address: vbarao@unicamp.br.

Photofunctionalization mediated by ultraviolet (UV) rays changes the
physico-chemical characteristics of titanium (Ti) and improves the biological
activity of dental implants. However, the role of UV-mediated
photofunctionalization of biofunctional Ti surfaces on the antimicrobial and
photocatalytic activity remains unknown and was investigated in this study.
Commercially pure titanium (cpTi) discs were divided into four groups: (1)
machined samples without UV light application [cpTi UV-]; (2) plasma electrolytic
oxidation (PEO) treated samples without UV light application [PEO UV-]; (3)
machined samples with UV light application [cpTi UV+]; and (4) PEO-treated
samples with UV light application [PEO UV+]. The surfaces were characterized
according to their morphology, roughness, crystalline phase, chemical composition
and wettability. The photocatalytic activity and proteins adsorption were
measured. For the microbiological assay, Streptococcus sanguinis was grown on the
disc surfaces for 1 h and 6 h, and the colony forming units and bacterial
organization were evaluated. In addition, to confirm the non-cytotoxic effect of 
PEO UV +, human gingival fibroblast (HGF) cells were cultured in a monolayer onto
each material surface and the cells viability and proliferation evaluated by a
fluorescent cell staining method. PEO treatment increased the Ti surface
roughness and wettability (p < 0.05). Photofunctionalization reduced the
hydrocarbon concentration and enhanced human blood plasma proteins and albumin
adsorption mainly for the PEO-treated surface (p < 0.05). PEO UV+ also maintained
higher wettability values for a longer period and provided microbial reduction at
1 h of bacterial adhesion (p = 0.012 vs. PEO UV-). Photofunctionalization did not
increase the photocatalytic activity of Ti (p > 0.05). Confocal microscopy
analyses demonstrated that PEO UV+ had no cell damage effect on HGF cells growth 
even after 24 h of incubation. The photofunctionalization of a biofunctional PEO 
coating seems to be a promising alternative for dental implants as it increases
blood plasma proteins adsorption, reduces initial bacterial adhesion and presents
no cytotoxicity effect.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2020.110657 
PMID: 32204085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

