
1. Lett Pept Sci. 2003;10(5):377-385. doi: 10.1007/s10989-004-2387-6.

Angiotensin Converting Enzyme-2 (ACE2) and its Possible Roles in Hypertension,
Diabetes and Cardiac Function.

Warner FJ(1)(2)(2), Guy JL(2), Lambert DW(2), Hooper NM(2), Turner AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)1Baker Heart Research Institute, Peptide Biology, Melbourne, Victoria 3004
Australia.
(2)2Proteolysis Research Group, School of Biochemistry and Microbiology,
University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT UK.

Angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) is a recently described homologue of the
vasoactive peptidase, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE). Like ACE, ACE2 is an
integral (type I) membrane zinc metallopeptidase, which exists as an ectoenzyme. 
ACE2 is less widely distributed than ACE in the body, being expressed at highest 
concentrations in the heart, kidney and testis. ACE2 also differs from ACE in its
substrate specificity, functioning exclusively as a carboxypeptidase rather than 
a peptidyl dipeptidase. A key role for ACE2 appears to be emerging in the
conversion of angiotensin II to angiotensin (1-7), allowing it to act as a
counter-balance to the actions of ACE. ACE2 has been localised to the endothelial
and epithelial cells of the heart and kidney where it may have a role at the cell
surface in hydrolysing bioactive peptides such as angiotensin II present in the
circulation. A role for ACE2 in the metabolism of other biologically active
peptides also needs to be considered. ACE2 also serendipitously appears to act as
a receptor for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus. Studies 
using ace2 -/- mice, and other emerging studies in vivo and in vitro, have
revealed that ACE2 has important functions in cardiac regulation and diabetes.
Together with its role as a SARS receptor, ACE2 is therefore likely to be an
important therapeutic target in a diverse range of disease states.

Â© Kluwer Academic Publishers 2003.

DOI: 10.1007/s10989-004-2387-6 
PMCID: PMC7088140
PMID: 32214681 

