
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2020;2116:739-753. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-0294-2_43.

Isolation of Trypanosoma brucei brucei Infection-Derived Splenic Marginal Zone B 
Cells Based on CD1dHigh/B220High Surface Expression in a Two-Step MACS-FACS
Approach.

Radwanska M(1)(2), Vereecke N(3)(4)(5), Magez S(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Center (BMRC), Department of Environmental Tech, Food
Tech, and Molecular Biotechnology, Ghent University, Incheon, South Korea.
magdalena.radwanska@ghent.ac.kr.
(2)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 
magdalena.radwanska@ghent.ac.kr.
(3)Biomedical Research Center (BMRC), Department of Environmental Tech, Food
Tech, and Molecular Biotechnology, Ghent University, Incheon, South Korea.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium.

Magnetic- and fluorescent-activated cell sorting (MACS and FACS) are used for
isolation of distinct cell populations for subsequent studies including
transcriptomics. The latter allows for the analysis of infection-induced
alterations in gene expression profiles. MACS and FACS both use antibodies
against cell surface molecules to isolate populations of interest. Standardized
methods for both approaches exist for use in mouse models. These protocols,
however, do not account for the fact that infection-associated immunopathology
can significantly modulate the cell surface expression of targeted molecules.
This is the case for Trypanosoma brucei brucei infection, where downregulation of
CD23 surface expression on B cells has been reported. This hallmark of
progressing infection interferes with the commercially available MACS technique
for B cell purification, as CD23 expression is the target for the separation
between Marginal Zone (MZ) and Follicular (Fo) B cells. Here, we provide a robust
alternative method for isolation of infection-derived MZ B cells using CD1d and
B220 surface molecules in a two-step MACS-FACS approach. The method yields 99%
pure viable infection-derived MZ B cells, allowing extraction of a high quality
total RNA suitable for subsequent RNA sequencing.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-0294-2_43 
PMID: 32221952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

