
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2020 Apr 1. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12792. [Epub ahead of
print]

TOLL-interacting protein in the freshwater fish Labeo rohita exhibits conserved
structural motifs of higher eukaryotes and is distinctly expressed in
PAMPs-stimulations and bacterial infections.

Mohanty A(1), Sadangi S(1), Paichha M(1), Saha A(1), Das S(2), Samanta M(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICAR-Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture, Kausalyaganga, Bhubaneswar, 
Odisha, India, 751002.
(2)Laboratory of Environmental Microbiology and Ecology (LEnME), Department of
Life Science, National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, Odisha, India, 769008.

TOLL-interacting protein (Tollip) is a critical regulator of TLRs (toll-like
receptors) signaling pathway. It is predominantly associated with TLR2 and TLR4
during the acute inflammatory conditions and inhibits the TLR-mediated NF-ÎºB
activation by suppressing the auto-phosphorylation of interleukin-1 receptor
associated kinase (IRAK1) and its kinase activity. This article describes about
the Tollip in Labeo rohita (LrTollip), a highly valuable freshwater fish of the
Indian subcontinent. The full-length LrTollip-cDNA (1412 nucleotides) encodes 276
amino acids protein, depicting highly conserved TBD {Target of Myb1 (Tom1)
binding domain: 1-53aa}, C2 (conserved core domain 2: 54-151aa) and CUE (coupling
of ubiquitin to endoplasmic reticulum degradation: 231-273aa) domains of mouse
and human counterparts. The key amino acids exerting the critical functions of
Tollip such as phospholipids recognition and ubiquitination are present in the C2
and CUE-domains of LrTollip respectively. LrTollip is widely expressed in kidney,
gill, spleen, liver and blood, and among these tested tissues, the highest
expression is observed in blood. In response to TLR-ligands and NLR-ligands
stimulations, Aeromonas hydrophila, Edwardsiella tarda and Bacillus subtilis
infections, LrTollip gene expression is induced in various organs/tissues with
remarkable difference in their kinetics. These data together suggest the
important role of LrTollip in TLR and NLR-signal transduction pathways and
immune-related diseases in fish. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12792 
PMID: 32237168 

