
1. PLoS One. 2020 Apr 1;15(4):e0231041. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231041.
eCollection 2020.

Factors associated with pneumococcal carriage and density in children and adults 
in Fiji, using four cross-sectional surveys.

Neal EFG(1)(2), Nguyen CD(1)(2), Ratu FT(3), Dunne EM(1)(2), Kama M(3), Ortika
BD(1), Boelsen LK(1), Kado J(4)(5), Tikoduadua L(3), Devi R(3), Tuivaga E(3),
Reyburn RC(1), Satzke C(1)(2), Rafai E(3), Mulholland EK(1)(2)(6), Russell
FM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infection & Immunity, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's 
Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(3)Ministry of Health and Medical Services, Suva, Fiji.
(4)Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, Western Australia,
Australia.
(5)College of Medicine Nursing and Health Sciences, Fiji National University,
Suva, Fiji.
(6)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

This study describes predictors of pneumococcal nasopharyngeal carriage and
density in Fiji. We used data from four annual (2012-2015) cross-sectional
surveys, pre- and post-introduction of ten-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine 
(PCV10) in October 2012. Infants (5-8 weeks), toddlers (12-23 months), children
(2-6 years), and their caregivers participated. Pneumococci were detected and
quantified using lytA qPCR, with molecular serotyping by microarray. Logistic and
quantile regression were used to determine predictors of pneumococcal carriage
and density, respectively. There were 8,109 participants. Pneumococcal carriage
was negatively associated with years post-PCV10 introduction (global P<0.001),
and positively associated with indigenous iTaukei ethnicity (aOR 2.74 [95% CI
2.17-3.45] P<0.001); young age (infant, toddler, and child compared with
caregiver participant groups) (global P<0.001); urban residence (aOR 1.45 [95% CI
1.30-2.57] P<0.001); living with â‰¥2 children <5 years of age (aOR 1.42 [95% CI
1.27-1.59] P<0.001); low family income (aOR 1.44 [95% CI 1.28-1.62] P<0.001); and
upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) symptoms (aOR 1.77 [95% CI 1.57-2.01]
P<0.001). Predictors were similar for PCV10 and non-PCV10 carriage, except PCV10 
carriage was negatively associated with PCV10 vaccination (0.58 [95% CI
0.41-0.82] P = 0.002) and positively associated with exposure to household
cigarette smoke (aOR 1.21 [95% CI 1.02-1.43] P = 0.031), while there was no
association between years post-PCV10 introduction and non-PCV10 carriage.
Pneumococcal density was positively associated with URTI symptoms (adjusted
median difference 0.28 [95% CI 0.16, 0.40] P<0.001) and toddler and child,
compared with caregiver, participant groups (global P = 0.008). Predictors were
similar for PCV10 and non-PCV10 density, except infant, toddler, and child
participant groups were not associated with PCV10 density. PCV10 introduction was
associated with reduced the odds of overall and PCV10 pneumococcal carriage in
Fiji. However, after adjustment iTaukei ethnicity was positively associated with 
pneumococcal carriage compared with Fijians of Indian Descent, despite similar
PCV10 coverage rates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231041 
PMCID: PMC7112956
PMID: 32236150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: CDN, CS, EKM, and EMD 
are investigators on a research projected funded by Pfizer for research in
Mongolia. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data 
and materials. All other authors have no declarations of competing interests to
declare

