
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Mar 30;8(4). pii: E489. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8040489.

The Not so Good, the Bad and the Ugly: Differential Bacterial Adhesion and
Invasion Mediated by Salmonella PagN Allelic Variants.

Wu Y(1)(2), Hu Q(1), Dehinwal R(1), Rakov AV(1), Grams N(1), Clemens EC(3),
Hofmann J(3), Okeke IN(3)(4), Schifferli DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Pennsylvania, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Zhejiang Agriculture and Forestry University, Hangzhou 311300, China.
(3)Department of Biology, Haverford College, Haverford, PA 19041, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Ibadan, Ibadan 200284, Oyo State, Nigeria.

While advances in genomic sequencing have highlighted significant strain
variability between and within Salmonella serovars, only a few protein variants
have been directly related to evolutionary adaptation for survival, such as host 
specificity or differential virulence. The current study investigated whether
allelic variation of the Salmonella adhesin/invasin PagN influences bacterial
interaction with their receptors. The Salmonella enterica, subspecies enterica
serovar Typhi (S. Typhi) allelic variant of PagN was found to bind significantly 
better to different enterocytes as well as to the extracellular matrix protein
laminin than did the major Salmonella enterica, subspecies enterica serovar
Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) allele. The two alleles differed at amino acid
residues 49 and 109 in two of the four predicted PagN surface loops, and residue 
substitution analysis revealed that a glutamic acid at residue 49 increased the
adhesive and invasive properties of S. Typhi PagN. PagN sequence comparisons from
542 Salmonella strains for six representative S. enterica serovars and S.
diarizonae further supported the role of glutamic acid at residues 49 and 109 in 
optimizing adhesion to cells and laminin, as well as for cell invasion. In
summary, this study characterized unique residues in allelic variants of a
virulence factor that participates in the colonization and invasive properties of
different Salmonella stains, subspecies and serovars.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8040489 
PMCID: PMC7232170
PMID: 32235448 

