
1. Biochem J. 1988 Dec 1;256(2):633-9.

The O2-dependence of respiration and H2O2 production in the parasitic nematode
Ascaridia galli.

Paget TA(1), Fry M, Lloyd D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University College, Cardiff, Wales, U.K.

1. Respiration in the parasitic nematode worm Ascaridia galli was inhibited at O2
concentrations in excess of 255 microM, and an apparent Km,O2 of 174 microM was
determined. 2. Mitochondria-enriched fractions isolated from the tissues of A.
galli have much lower apparent Km,O2 values (approx. 5 microM). They produce H2O2
in the energized state; higher rates of H2O2 production were observed in the
presence of the uncoupler carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone. 3. Antimycin 
A inhibited respiration in muscle tissue mitochondria by 10%, but had no effect
on respiration in gut + reproductive tissue mitochondria; the major portion of
respiration in both types of mitochondria could be attributed to an alternative
electron-transport pathway. 4. o-Hydroxydiphenyl, an inhibitor of alternative
electron-transport pathways, inhibits respiration by 98% and completely inhibits 
the production of H2O2 in gut-plus-reproductive-tissue mitochondria; respiration 
and H2O2 production in muscle tissue mitochondria were inhibited by 90 and 86%
respectively. 5. Another inhibitor of alternative electron transport,
salicylhydroxamic acid, had the same effect as o-hydroxydiphenyl on H2O2
production and respiration in gut-plus-reproductive-tissue mitochondria. However,
its effect on muscle tissue mitochondria was complex; a low concentration (0.35
mM) stimulated H2O2 production, whereas 3 mM inhibited respiration by 87% and
prevented H2O2 production completely. 6. The similarities between the apparent
Km,O2 values for H2O2 production and respiration in muscle mitochondria and in
gut-plus-reproductive-tissue mitochondria suggests that the site of H2O2
production on the alternative electron-transport chain is cytochrome 'o'. 7.
These results are discussed in relation to potential O2 toxicity in A. galli.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2560633 
PMCID: PMC1135456
PMID: 3223936  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

