
1. Toxins (Basel). 2020 Mar 31;12(4). pii: E220. doi: 10.3390/toxins12040220.

Bacterial Factors Targeting the Nucleus: The Growing Family of Nucleomodulins.

Bierne H(1), Pourpre R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universit√© Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, Micalis Institute, Epigenetics 
and Cellular Microbiology team, F-78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Pathogenic bacteria secrete a variety of proteins that manipulate host cell
function by targeting components of the plasma membrane, cytosol, or organelles. 
In the last decade, several studies identified bacterial factors acting within
the nucleus on gene expression or other nuclear processes, which has led to the
emergence of a new family of effectors called "nucleomodulins". In human and
animal pathogens, Listeria monocytogenes for Gram-positive bacteria and Anaplasma
phagocytophilum, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, Chlamydia trachomatis, Legionella
pneumophila, Shigella flexneri, and Escherichia coli for Gram-negative bacteria, 
have led to pioneering discoveries. In this review, we present these paradigms
and detail various mechanisms and core elements (e.g., DNA, histones, epigenetic 
regulators, transcription or splicing factors, signaling proteins) targeted by
nucleomodulins. We particularly focus on nucleomodulins interacting with
epifactors, such as LntA of Listeria and ankyrin repeat- or tandem
repeat-containing effectors of Rickettsiales, and nucleomodulins from various
bacterial species acting as post-translational modification enzymes. The study of
bacterial nucleomodulins not only generates important knowledge about the control
of host responses by microbes but also creates new tools to decipher the dynamic 
regulations that occur in the nucleus. This research also has potential
applications in the field of biotechnology. Finally, this raises questions about 
the epigenetic effects of infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12040220 
PMCID: PMC7232420
PMID: 32244550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

