
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Apr 2;21(7). pii: E2473. doi: 10.3390/ijms21072473.

Oxidative Damage in Sporadic Colorectal Cancer: Molecular Mapping of Base
Excision Repair Glycosylases in Colorectal Cancer Patients.

Vodicka P(1)(2)(3), Urbanova M(3), Makovicky P(4), Tomasova K(1)(2), Kroupa
M(1)(2), Stetina R(5), Opattova A(1)(2)(3), Kostovcikova K(6), Siskova A(1)(3),
Schneiderova M(7), Vymetalkova V(1)(2)(3), Vodickova L(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology of Cancer, Institute of Experimental Medicine 
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Biomedical Centre, Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University, Alej
Svobody 1655, 323 00 Pilsen, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University, Albertov 4, 128 00 Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Education, J Selye University, Bratislavska 
3322, 945 01 Komarno, Slovakia.
(5)Department of Toxicology and Military Pharmacy, Faculty of Military Health
Sciences, University of Defence, Trebesska 1575, 500 01 Hradec Kralove, Czech
Republic.
(6)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Institute of Microbiology of 
the Czech Academy of Sciences, Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague, Czech Republic.
(7)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady in Prague,
Third Medical Faculty, Charles University, Ruska 87, 100 00 Prague, Czech
Republic.

Oxidative stress with subsequent premutagenic oxidative DNA damage has been
implicated in colorectal carcinogenesis. The repair of oxidative DNA damage is
initiated by lesion-specific DNA glycosylases (hOGG1, NTH1, MUTYH). The direct
evidence of the role of oxidative DNA damage and its repair is proven by
hereditary syndromes (MUTYH-associated polyposis, NTHL1-associated tumor
syndrome), where germline mutations cause loss-of-function in glycosylases of
base excision repair, thus enabling the accumulation of oxidative DNA damage and 
leading to the adenoma-colorectal cancer transition. Unrepaired oxidative DNA
damage often results in G:C>T:A mutations in tumor suppressor genes and
proto-oncogenes and widespread occurrence of chromosomal copy-neutral loss of
heterozygosity. However, the situation is more complicated in complex and
heterogeneous disease, such as sporadic colorectal cancer. Here we summarized our
current knowledge of the role of oxidative DNA damage and its repair on the
onset, prognosis and treatment of sporadic colorectal cancer. Molecular and
histological tumor heterogeneity was considered. Our study has also suggested an 
additional important source of oxidative DNA damage due to intestinal dysbiosis. 
The roles of base excision repair glycosylases (hOGG1, MUTYH) in tumor and
adjacent mucosa tissues of colorectal cancer patients, particularly in the
interplay with other factors (especially microenvironment), deserve further
attention. Base excision repair characteristics determined in colorectal cancer
tissues reflect, rather, a disease prognosis. Finally, we discuss the role of DNA
repair in the treatment of colon cancer, since acquired or inherited defects in
DNA repair pathways can be effectively used in therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21072473 
PMCID: PMC7177219
PMID: 32252452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

