
1. Biochemistry. 2020 Apr 28;59(16):1630-1639. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00126.
Epub 2020 Apr 13.

Structure and Function of BorB, the Type II Thioesterase from the Borrelidin
Biosynthetic Gene Cluster.

Curran SC(1), Pereira JH(1), Baluyot MJ(1), Lake J(1), Puetz H(2)(1), Rosenburg
DJ, Adams P(1), Keasling JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Joint BioEnergy Institute, 5885 Hollis Street, Emeryville, California 94608,
United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cologne, 50923
Albertus-Magnus-Platz, Cologne 51149, Germany.

α/β hydrolases make up a large and diverse protein superfamily. In natural
product biosynthesis, cis-acting thioesterase α/β hydrolases can terminate
biosynthetic assembly lines and release products by hydrolyzing or cyclizing the 
biosynthetic intermediate. Thioesterases can also act in trans, removing aberrant
intermediates and restarting stalled biosynthesis. Knockout of this "editing"
function leads to reduced product titers. The borrelidin biosynthetic gene
cluster from Streptomyces parvulus Tü4055 contains a hitherto uncharacterized
stand-alone thioesterase, borB. In this work, we demonstrate that purified BorB
cleaves acyl substrates with a preference for propionate, which supports the
hypothesis that it is also an editing thioesterase. The crystal structure of BorB
shows a wedgelike hydrophobic substrate binding crevice that limits substrate
length. To investigate the structure-function relationship, we made chimeric BorB
variants using loop regions from characterized homologues with different
specificities. BorB chimeras slightly reduced activity, arguing that the modified
region is a not major determinant of substrate preference. The structure-function
relationships described here contribute to the process of elimination for
understanding thioesterase specificity and, ultimately, engineering and applying 
trans-acting thioesterases in biosynthetic assembly lines.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00126 
PMID: 32250597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

