
1. J Mater Chem B. 2015 Sep 21;3(35):7068-7078. doi: 10.1039/c5tb01259g. Epub 2015
Aug 13.

A zinc complex of a neutral pyridine-based amphiphile: a highly efficient and
potentially therapeutic bactericidal material.

Goswami S (1), Thiyagarajan D , Samanta S , Das G , Ramesh A .

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, Assam, India. aramesh@iitg.ernet.in.

The alarming rise in antibiotic-resistant pathogenic bacteria demands a prudent
approach in the generation of therapeutic antibacterials. The present study
illustrates the development of a potent amphiphilic bactericidal material
tailored to leverage interactions with metal-reactive groups (MRGs) present in
the bacterial cell surface envelope. Complexation of Zn(ii) with a neutral
pyridine-based synthetic amphiphile (C1) generated the cationic C1-Zn, which
exhibited manyfold higher membrane-directed bactericidal activity compared to the
neutral C1, or the cationic amphiphile bearing two pyridinium head groups (C2).
The relevance of MRGs in C1-Zn-bacteria interactions was validated by
amphiphile-bacteria binding studies and metal protection assays performed with
Mg(ii). C1-Zn retained its bactericidal activity even in simulated gastric fluid 
(SGF) and the enhanced membrane-directed bactericidal activity of C1-Zn could be 
garnered in adjuvant applications to increase the efficacy of the therapeutic
antibiotic erythromycin. Given the relevance of Zn(ii) in S. aureus biofilm
formation, the antibiofilm potential of the amphiphile C1 realized through Zn(ii)
complexation could be demonstrated. The lack of resistance in target bacteria
coupled with a favorable therapeutic index (IC50/MIC) and non-toxic nature hold
significant implications for C1-Zn as a potential antibacterial therapeutic
material.

DOI: 10.1039/c5tb01259g 
PMID: 32262709 

