
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Apr 3;21(7). pii: E2490. doi: 10.3390/ijms21072490.

2-Aminopyridine Analogs Inhibit Both Enzymes of the Glyoxylate Shunt in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

McVey AC(1), Bartlett S(2), Kajbaf M(3), Pellacani A(3), Gatta V(4), Tammela
P(4), Spring DR(2), Welch M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QW, UK.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK.
(3)Aptuit LLC, an Evotec Company, 37135 VR Verona, Italy.
(4)Drug Research Program, Division of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, University of
Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen responsible for many
hospital-acquired infections. P. aeruginosa can thrive in diverse infection
scenarios by rewiring its central metabolism. An example of this is the
production of biomass from C2 nutrient sources such as acetate via the glyoxylate
shunt when glucose is not available. The glyoxylate shunt is comprised of two
enzymes, isocitrate lyase (ICL) and malate synthase G (MS), and flux through the 
shunt is essential for the survival of the organism in mammalian systems. In this
study, we characterized the mode of action and cytotoxicity of structural analogs
of 2-aminopyridines, which have been identified by earlier work as being
inhibitory to both shunt enzymes. Two of these analogs were able to inhibit ICL
and MS in vitro and prevented growth of P. aeruginosa on acetate (indicating cell
permeability). Moreover, the compounds exerted negligible cytotoxicity against
three human cell lines and showed promising in vitro drug metabolism and safety
profiles. Isothermal titration calorimetry was used to confirm binding of one of 
the analogs to ICL and MS, and the mode of enzyme inhibition was determined. Our 
data suggest that these 2-aminopyridine analogs have potential as
anti-pseudomonal agents.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21072490 
PMCID: PMC7177833
PMID: 32260167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

