
1. Exp Cell Res. 2020 Jun 15;391(2):111938. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2020.111938. Epub
2020 Apr 9.

Identification of very small cancer stem cells expressing hallmarks of
pluripotency in B16F10 melanoma cells and their reoccurrence in B16F10-derived
clones.

Dias Câmara DA(1), Luiz de Sá Junior P(2), Alexandre de Azevedo R(3), Figueiredo 
CR(4), Araldi RP(5), Levy D(6), Madeiro de Souza D(7), Kerkis I(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Butantan Institute, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil;
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, Programa de Pós-graduação em Biologia
Estrutural e Funcional, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: diana.adc@gmail.com.
(2)Universidade Mogi das Cruzes (UMC), Villa Lobos Campus, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Electronic address: paulsaj2001@yahoo.com.br.
(3)Experimental Oncology Unit (UNONEX), Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology
Department, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Experimental Oncology Unit (UNONEX), Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology
Department, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil; Department of
Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool,
United Kingdom.
(5)Laboratory of Genetic Basis of Thyroid Cancer, Federal University of Sao
Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Hematology (LIM31), University of Sao
Paulo School of Medicine, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(7)Laboratory of Genetics, Butantan Institute, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(8)Laboratory of Genetics, Butantan Institute, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic 
address: irina.kerkis@butantan.gov.br.

Melanoma is characterized by high heterogeneity and plasticity, most likely due
to the presence of mutated melanocyte stem cells or immature progenitor cells in 
the skin that serves as precursors to melanoma. In the present study, for the
first time, we identified rare cells in the murine melanoma B16F10, and human
A2058 and SK-MEL-28 cell lines that express pluripotency markers, including Oct4,
Nanog, Sox2 and a marker of melanoma cancer cells (ALDH1/2). These cells are very
small with round morphology and they grow onto melanoma cells, thereby
demonstrating feeder layer dependence similar to that of other pluripotent cells.
These cells underwent self-renewal, symmetric and asymmetric division. We called 
these cells murine very small cancer stem cells (VSCSC). VSCSC were also found in
B16F10-derived clones after 3-5 consecutive passages, where they occur as single 
cells or as small colonies, nevertheless, always using melanoma cells as feeders.
These cells formed melanospheres enriched with Oct4-and ALDH1/2-positive cells.
We also evaluated the possible effect of VSCSC that presented in the parental
cell line (B16F10) and in clones based on their functional characteristics. We
found that VCSCS present in the B16F10 cell line reappearing in their clones were
required for continuous tumor growth and were responsible for melanoma cell
heterogeneity and plasticity rather than directly affecting functional
characteristics of melanoma cells. Our data, together with those of previous
reports suggested the existence of melanoma-competent melanocyte stem cells,
which corroborate the hypothesis of the existence of tumor-initiating cells and
cancer stem cell hierarchies, at least in melanoma.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2020.111938 
PMID: 32278688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.

