
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2020 Jun;107(6):1167-1173. doi: 10.1002/JLB.3AB0220-470R. Epub
2020 Apr 9.

Truncation of CXCL8 to CXCL8(9-77) enhances actin polymerization and in vivo
migration of neutrophils.

Metzemaekers M(1), Vandendriessche S(1), Berghmans N(1), Gouwy M(1), Proost P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Rega Institute for Medical Research,
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, University of Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.

CXCL8 is the principal human neutrophil-attracting chemokine and a major mediator
of inflammation. The chemokine exerts its neutrophil-chemotactic and
neutrophil-activating activities via interaction with glycosaminoglycans (GAGs)
and activation of the G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) CXCR1 and CXCR2.
Natural CXCL8 displays an exceptional degree of amino (NH2 )-terminal
heterogeneity. Most CXCL8 forms result from proteolytic processing of authentic
CXCL8(1-77). Here, we compared the potencies to activate and recruit neutrophils 
of the 3 most abundant natural CXCL8 forms: full-length 77 amino acid CXCL8 and
the 2 major natural truncated forms lacking 5 or 8 NH2 -terminal amino acids. NH2
-terminal truncation hardly affected the capacity of CXCL8 to induce shedding of 
CD62L or to up-regulate the expression of the adhesion molecules CD11a, CD11b, or
CD15 on human neutrophils. In addition, the potency of CXCL8 to induce neutrophil
degranulation and its effect on phagocytosis remained unaltered upon removal of 5
or 8 NH2 -terminal residues. However, NH2 -terminal truncation strongly
potentiated CXCL8-induced actin polymerization. CXCL8(6-77) and CXCL8(9-77)
showed a comparable capacity to induce Ca2+ signaling in human neutrophils and to
direct in vitro neutrophil migration. Strikingly, the ability of CXCL8(9-77) to
recruit neutrophils into the peritoneal cavity of mice was significantly enhanced
compared to CXCL8(6-77). These results suggest that NH2 -terminal truncation
influences specific biological activities of CXCL8 and indicate that CXCL8(9-77) 
may be the most potent neutrophil-attracting CXCL8 form in vivo.

Â©2020 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/JLB.3AB0220-470R 
PMID: 32272490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

