
1. Vet Microbiol. 2020 Apr;243:108650. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2020.108650. Epub 2020 
Mar 19.

Identification of Haemophilus parasuis genes uniquely expressed during infection 
using in vivo-induced antigen technology.

Mao W(1), Zhang S(1), Sun J(1), Gu J(1), Xu X(1), Cai X(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China; Key Laboratory 
of Preventive Veterinary Medicine in Hubei Province, The Cooperative Innovation
Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan, 430070, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China; Key Laboratory 
of Preventive Veterinary Medicine in Hubei Province, The Cooperative Innovation
Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan, 430070, China. Electronic address: 
caixuwang@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Haemophilus parasuis is the etiological agent of Glässer's disease which is
characterized by fibrinous polyserositis, arthritis and meningitis. The
pathogenesis of this bacterium remains largely unknown. Genes expressed in vivo
may play an important role in the pathogenicity of H. parasuis. The development
of in vivo-induced antigen technology (IVIAT) has provided a valuable tool for
the identification of in vivo-induced genes during bacterial infection. In this
study, IVIAT was applied to identify in vivo-induced antigens of H. parasuis.
Pooled swine H. parasuis-positive sera, adsorbed against in vitro-grown cultures 
of H. parasuis SH0165 and Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3), were used to screen the
inducible expression library of genomic proteins from whole genome sequenced H.
parsuis SH0165. Finally, 24 unique genes expressed in vivo were successfully
identified after secondary and tertiary screening with IVIAT. These genes were
implicated in cell surface proteins, metabolism, stress response, regulation,
transportation and other processes. Quantitative real-time PCR showed that the
mRNA levels of 24 genes were all upregulated in vivo relative to in vitro, with
13 genes were detected significantly upregulated in H. parasuis infected pigs.
Several potential virulence-associated genes were found to be uniquely expressed 
in vivo, including espP, lnt, hutZ, mreC, vtaA, pilB, tex, sunT and aidA. The
results indicated that the proteins identified using IVIAT may play important
roles in the pathogenesis of H. parasuis infection in vivo.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2020.108650 
PMID: 32273024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that there are no financial or other relationships that might lead to a
conflict of interest. All authors have seen and approved the manuscript.

