
1. PLoS One. 2020 Apr 10;15(4):e0231268. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231268.
eCollection 2020.

Regulatory effects of Lactobacillus plantarum HY7714 on skin health by improving 
intestinal condition.

Nam B(1), Kim SA(1), Park SD(1), Kim HJ(1), Kim JS(1), Bae CH(1), Kim JY(1), Nam 
W(1), Lee JL(1), Sim JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)R&BD Center, Korea Yakult Co. Ltd., Yongin, Republic of Korea.

Despite increasing research on the gut-skin axis, there is a lack of
comprehensive studies on the improvement of skin health through the regulation of
the intestinal condition in humans. In this study, we investigated the benefits
of Lactobacillus plantarum HY7714 (HY7714) consumption on skin health through its
modulatory effects on the intestine and ensuing immune responses. HY7714
consumption led to differences in bacterial abundances from phylum to genus
level, including increases in Actinobacteria followed by Bifidobacterium and a
decrease in Proteobacteria. Additionally, HY7714 significantly ameliorated
inflammation by reducing matrix metallopeptidases (MMP-2 and MMP-9), zonulin, and
calprotectin in plasma, all of which are related to skin and intestinal
permeability. Furthermore, RNA-seq analysis revealed its efficacy at restoring
the integrity of the gut barrier by regulating gene expression associated with
the extracellular matrix and immunity. This was evident by the upregulation of
IGFBP5, SERPINE1, EFEMP1, COL6A3, and SEMA3B and downregulation of MT2A, MT1E,
MT1X, MT1G, and MT1F between TNF- α and TNF- α plus HY7714 treated Caco-2 cells. 
These results propose the potential mechanistic role of HY7714 on skin health by 
the regulation of the gut condition.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231268 
PMCID: PMC7147770
PMID: 32275691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author have read the journal's policy and the
authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: Authors [BN,
SAK, SDP, HJK, JSK, CHB, JYK, WN, JLL and JHS] are paid employees of Korea Yakult
Co. Ltd. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data
and materials. There are no patents, products in development or marketed products
to declare.

