
1. Thromb Haemost. 2020 Apr;120(4):647-657. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1705117. Epub 2020
Apr 14.

Heparanase Facilitates PMA-Induced Megakaryocytic Differentiation in K562 Cells
via Interleukin 6/STAT3 Pathway.

Wan LM(1)(2), Zhang SK(1), Li SB(1), Li W(1), Ji SP(1), Gong L(1)(3), Yun ZM(1), 
Zhang X(1), Gao HW(1), Zhong H(2), Wei CW(2), Bian LH(4), Zhuo HL(5), Luo Q(5),
Li JP(6), Tan YX(1), Gong F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Lab, Institute of Health Service and
Transfusion Medicine, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Genetic Engineering, Beijing Institute of Biotechnology,
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, No.971 Hospital of Chinese PLA, Qingdao, 
Shandong, China.
(4)Department of Gynecology, The Fifth Medical Center of Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Transfusion, The Fifth Medical Center, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, SciLifeLab Uppsala, The
Biomedical Center, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.

Heparanase (HPSE) is an endo-β-D-glucuronidase that cleaves heparan sulfate and
hence participates in remodeling of the extracellular matrix, leading to release 
of cytokines that are immobilized by binding to heparan sulfate proteoglycans
(HSPGs), and consequently activating signaling pathways. This function of HPSE is
correlated to its expression level that is normally very low in majority of the
tissues. Exceptionally, human platelets express high level of HPSE, suggesting a 
unique physiological role in this cell. Using K562 cell line, we found a
progressive increase of HPSE during the megakaryocytic differentiation. Analysis 
of a series of megakaryocytic differentiation-related heparin-binding proteins
(HBPs) in the cell culture medium revealed an exclusive positive correlation
between the level of interleukin 6 (IL-6) and HPSE expression. IL-6 modulated
megakaryocytic differentiation through activation of STAT3. Further, we
demonstrated that overexpression of HPSE potentiates megakaryocytic
differentiation, whereas elimination of HPSE led to a delayed differentiation.
This function of HPSE is associated with its activity, as overexpression of
inactive HPSE had no effect on IL-6 production and megakaryocytic
differentiation. The role of HPSE is further supported by the observation in an
umbilical cord blood CD34+ cells megakaryocytic differentiation model. Our data
propose a novel role for HPSE in platelets production by a HPSE/IL-6/STAT3
positive feedback loop that specifically regulates megakaryocytes maturation.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0040-1705117 
PMID: 32289862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

