
1. Epigenetics. 2020 Nov;15(11):1195-1212. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2020.1754675. Epub 
2020 Apr 21.

The landscape of CD28, CD80, CD86, CTLA4, and ICOS DNA methylation in head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas.

de Vos L(1), Grünwald I(1), Bawden EG(2), Dietrich J(1), Scheckenbach K(3), Wiek 
C(3), Zarbl R(1), Bootz F(1), Landsberg J(4), Dietrich D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Bonn, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn , Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, The University of Melbourne at the
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection & Immunity , Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Düsseldorf , Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital Bonn, Rheinische
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn , Bonn, Germany.

CTLA-4 blocking therapeutic antibodies are currently under investigation in head 
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). A better understanding of the
epigenetic regulation of the CD28 superfamily members CD28, CTLA-4, and ICOS and 
their B7 ligands, CD80 and CD86, could support the development of biomarkers for 
response prediction to anti-CTLA-4 immunotherapy. We investigated methylation of 
the encoding genes CD28, CTLA4, ICOS, CD80, and CD86 at single CpG resolution (51
CpG sites) in a cohort of HNSCC (N = 528) and normal adjacent tissue samples (N
= 50) provided by The Cancer Genome Research Atlas, in isolated blood leukocytes 
from healthy individuals (N = 28), and HNSCC cell lines (N = 39). We analysed
methylation levels with regard to mRNA expression, overall survival, mutational
load, interferon-γ signature, and signatures of immune cell infiltrates.
Depending on the location of the CpG sites (promoter, promoter flank, gene body, 
and intergenic sites), we found significant differences in methylation levels
among isolated leukocytes, between leukocytes and HNSCC cell lines, and among
HNSCCs. Methylation of all analysed genes correlated inversely or positively with
mRNA expression, depending on the CpG site. CD28, CTLA4, and ICOS revealed almost
identical correlation patterns. Furthermore, we found significant correlations
with survival and features of response to immunotherapy, i.e. interferon-γ
signature, signatures of tumour infiltrating immune cells, and mutational load.
Our results suggest CD28, CTLA4, ICOS, CD80, and CD86 expression levels are
epigenetically co-regulated by DNA methylation. This study provides rationale to 
test their DNA methylation as potential biomarker for prediction of response to
CTLA-4 immune checkpoint inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1080/15592294.2020.1754675 
PMCID: PMC7595594 [Available on 2021-04-21]
PMID: 32281488 

