
1. Pathogens. 2020 Apr 9;9(4). pii: E273. doi: 10.3390/pathogens9040273.

Acquired AmpC β-Lactamases among Enterobacteriaceae from Healthy Humans and
Animals, Food, Aquatic and Trout Aquaculture Environments in Portugal.

Gonçalves Ribeiro T(1), Novais Â(1), Machado E(1)(2), Peixe L(1).

Author information: 
(1)UCIBIO-REQUIMTE, Laboratory of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
of Porto, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal.
(2)FP-ENAS/CEBIMED, Faculty of Health Sciences, University Fernando Pessoa,
4200-250 Porto, Portugal.

We aimed to investigate the occurrence of acquired AmpC β-lactamases (qAmpC), and
characterize qAmpC-producing Enterobacteriaceae from different non-clinical
environments in Portugal. We analysed 880 Enterobacteriaceae resistant to
third-generation cephalosporins recovered from 632 non-clinical samples [healthy 
human and healthy animal (swine, chickens) faeces; uncooked chicken carcasses;
aquatic and trout aquaculture samples]. Bacterial and qAmpC identification,
antibiotic susceptibility, clonal (PFGE, MLST) and plasmid (S1-/I-CeuI-PFGE,
replicon typing, hybridization) analysis were performed using standard methods.
The occurrence of qAmpC among Enterobacteriaceae from non-clinical origins was
low (0.6%; n = 4/628 samples), corresponding to CMY-2-producing Escherichia coli 
from three healthy humans (HH) and one uncooked chicken carcass (UCC). We
highlight a slight increase in CMY-2 human faecal carriage in the two periods
sampled [1.0% in 2013-2014 versus 0% in 2001-2004], which is in accordance with
the trend observed in other European countries. CMY-2-producing E. coli belonged 
to B22-ST4953 (n = 2, HH), A0-ST665 (n = 1, HH) or A1-ST48 (n = 1, UCC) clones.
blaCMY-2 was identified in non-typeable and IncA/C2 plasmids. This study is one
of the few providing an integrated evaluation of the qAmpC-producing
Enterobacteriaceae occurrence, which was low, from a very large collection of
different non-clinical origins. Further surveillance in contemporary collections 
can provide an integrated epidemiological information of potential shifts in
reservoirs, transmission routes and mechanisms of dissemination of blaqAmpC in
non-clinical settings.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens9040273 
PMCID: PMC7238129
PMID: 32283601 

