
1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2020 Jun 1;318(6):C1136-C1143. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00015.2020. Epub 2020 Apr 15.

Epithelial transport in digestive diseases: mice, monolayers, and mechanisms.

Barrett KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego School of Medicine,
La Jolla, California.

The transport of electrolytes and fluid by the intestinal epithelium is critical 
in health to maintain appropriate levels of fluidity of the intestinal contents. 
The transport mechanisms that underlie this physiological process are also
subject to derangement in various digestive disease states, such as diarrheal
illnesses. This article summarizes the 2019 Hans Ussing Lecture of the Epithelial
Transport Group of the American Physiological Society and discusses some pathways
by which intestinal transport is dysregulated, particularly in the setting of
infection with the diarrheal pathogen, Salmonella, and in patients treated with
small-molecule inhibitors of the tyrosine kinase activity of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFr-TKI). The burdensome diarrhea in patients infected with
Salmonella may be attributable to decreased expression of the
chloride-bicarbonate exchanger downregulated in adenoma (DRA) that participates
in electroneutral NaCl absorption. This outcome is possibly secondary to
increased epithelial proliferation and/or decreased epithelial differentiation
that occurs following infection. Conversely, the diarrheal side effects of cancer
treatment with EGFr-TKI may be related to the known ability of EGFr-associated
signaling to reduce calcium-dependent chloride secretion. Overall, the findings
described may suggest targets for therapeutic intervention in a variety of
diarrheal disease states.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00015.2020 
PMCID: PMC7311737 [Available on 2021-06-01]
PMID: 32293934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

