
1. Toxins (Basel). 2020 Apr 13;12(4). pii: E252. doi: 10.3390/toxins12040252.

A Bacillus thuringiensis Chitin-Binding Protein is Involved in Insect Peritrophic
Matrix Adhesion and Takes Part in the Infection Process.

Qin J(1), Tong Z(1), Zhan Y(1)(2), Buisson C(3), Song F(2), He K(2),
Nielsen-LeRoux C(3), Guo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193,
China.
(3)Micalis Institute, INRAE (National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food
and Environment), AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 78350 Jouy en Josas,
France.

Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is used for insect pest control, and its larvicidal
activity is primarily attributed to Cry toxins. Other factors participate in
infection, and limited information is available regarding factors acting on the
peritrophic matrix (PM). This study aimed to investigate the role of a Bt
chitin-binding protein (CBPA) that had been previously shown to be expressed at
pH 9 in vitro and could therefore be expressed in the alkaline gut of
lepidopteron larvae. A ∆cbpA mutant was generated that was 10-fold less virulent 
than wild-type Bt HD73 towards Ostrinia furnacalis neonate larvae, indicating its
important role in infection. Purified recombinant Escherichia coli CBPA was shown
to have a chitin affinity, thus indicating a possible interaction with the
chitin-rich PM. A translational GFP-CBPA fusion elucidated the localization of
CBPA on the bacterial surface, and the transcriptional activity of the promoter
PcbpA was immediately induced and confirmed at pH 9. Next, in order to connect
surface expression and possible in vivo gut activity, last instar Galleria
mellonella (Gm) larvae (not susceptible to Bt HD-73) were used as a model to
follow CBPA in gut expression, bacterial transit, and PM adhesion. CBPA-GFP was
quickly expressed in the Gm gut lumen, and more Bt HD73 strain bacteria adhered
to the PM than those of the ∆cbpA mutant strain. Therefore, CBPA may help to
retain the bacteria, via the PM binding, close to the gut surface and thus takes 
part in the early steps of Bt gut interactions.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12040252 
PMCID: PMC7232397
PMID: 32294913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

