
1. Ecotoxicology. 2020 Jul;29(5):535-550. doi: 10.1007/s10646-020-02201-8. Epub 2020
Apr 15.

Ecotoxicological profiling of selected cyanobacterial strains using
multi-endpoint effect-directed analysis.

Marić P(1), Ahel M(2), Babić O(3), Simeunović J(3), Smital T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Ecotoxicology, Division for Marine and Environmental 
Research, Ruđer Bošković Institute, 10000, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Laboratory for Analytical Chemistry and Biogeochemistry of Organic Compounds, 
Division for Marine and Environmental Research, Ruđer Bošković Institute, 10000, 
Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Novi
Sad, Trg Dositeja Obradovića 3, Novi Sad, 21000, Serbia.
(4)Laboratory for Molecular Ecotoxicology, Division for Marine and Environmental 
Research, Ruđer Bošković Institute, 10000, Zagreb, Croatia. smital@irb.hr.

The main goal of this study was to perform an ecotoxicological profiling of
terrestrial and aquatic cyanobacterial strains found in different soils or in
toxic cyanobacterial blooms in Vojvodina region, Serbia, using the
effect-directed analysis (EDA) approach. The applied procedure was based on a
series of in vitro or small-scale bioassays covering multiple endpoints in
combination with advanced chemical analytical protocols. Non-selective and
non-target preparation techniques were used for the extraction of a broad range
of chemical compounds present in three terrestrial (Anabaena Č2, Anabaena Č5,
Nostoc S8) and three aquatic (Nostoc Z1, Phormidium Z2, Oscillatoria K3) strains.
Ecotoxicological endpoints addressed included evaluation of the fish cytotoxicity
in vitro (acute toxicity), algal growth inhibition (chronic toxicity), and
interaction with cellular detoxification mechanisms. All cyanobacterial strains
tested in the 1st tier EDA showed significant effects in terms of chronic
toxicity and interaction with cellular detoxification. Three major fractions of
different polarities were further tested in the 2nd tier, using bioassays which
showed the strongest response: induction of CYP1A1 biotransformation enzyme and
inhibition of zebrafish organic anion (Oatp1d1) and cation (Oct1) uptake
transporters. Oscillatoria K3 strain was selected for a more detailed 3rd tier
EDA, and the obtained results revealed that positive sub-fractions possess polar 
anion and cation compounds that are reactive to both uptake transporters, and
compounds responsible for the strongest effects have a pronounced lipophilic
character. Apart from lipophilic non-polar compounds that represent typical phase
I substrates, sub-fractions that contained polar substances are also shown to
significantly induce CYP1A1.

DOI: 10.1007/s10646-020-02201-8 
PMID: 32297059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

