
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Jul 2;324:108624. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108624. Epub 2020 Apr 3.

First detection of a plasmid located carbapenem resistant blaVIM-1 gene in E.
coli isolated from meat products at retail in Belgium in 2015.

Garcia-Graells C(1), Berbers B(2), Verhaegen B(3), Vanneste K(4), Marchal K(5),
Roosens NHC(4), Botteldoorn N(3), De Keersmaecker SCJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Foodborne Pathogens, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address:
MariaCristina.GarciaGraells@sciensano.be.
(2)Transversal activities in Applied Genomics, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium;
Department of Information Technology, IDLab, Ghent University, IMEC, Ghent,
Belgium.
(3)Foodborne Pathogens, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Transversal activities in Applied Genomics, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Department of Information Technology, IDLab, Ghent University, IMEC, Ghent,
Belgium; Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.

Carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE) confer resistance to antibiotics
that are of critical importance to human medicine. There have only been a few
reported cases of CPEs in the European food chain. We report the first detection 
of a carbapenemase-producing Escherichia coli (ST 5869) in the Belgian food
chain. Our aim was to characterize the origin of the carbapenem resistance in the
E. coli isolate. The isolate was detected during the screening of 178 minced pork
samples and was shown to contain the carbapenemase gene blaVIM-1 by PCR and
Sanger sequencing. Whole genome short and long read sequencing (MiSeq and MinION)
was performed to characterize the isolate. With a hybrid assembly we
reconstructed a 190,205 bp IncA/C2 plasmid containing blaVIM-1 (S15FP06257_p), in
addition to other critically important resistance genes. This plasmid showed only
low similarity to plasmids containing blaVIM-1 previously reported in Germany.
Moreover, no sequences existed in the NCBI nucleotide database that completely
covered S15FP06257_p. Analysis of the blaVIM-1 gene cassette demonstrated that it
likely originated from an integron of a Klebsiella plasmid reported previously in
a clinical isolate in Europe, suggesting that the meat could have been
contaminated by human handling in one of the steps of the food chain. This study 
shows the relevance of fully reconstructing plasmids to characterize their
genetic content and to allow source attribution. This is especially important in 
view of the potential risk of antimicrobial resistance gene transmission through 
mobile elements as was reported here for the of public health concern blaVIM-1.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108624 
PMID: 32302878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.

