
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2020 Sep;39(9):1645-1649. doi:
10.1007/s10096-020-03887-8. Epub 2020 Apr 18.

Performances and usefulness of Xpert MTB/RIF assay in low-incidence settings: not
that bad?

Pham TT(1), Schrenzel J(2)(3), Janssens JP(4), Emonet S(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Geneva University
Hospitals, Rue Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil 4, CH 1211, Geneva, Switzerland.
Truong-Thanh.Pham@hcuge.ch.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Geneva University
Hospitals, Rue Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil 4, CH 1211, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Bacteriology Laboratory, Department of Diagnostic, Geneva University
Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Division of Pulmonary Diseases, Department of Medicine, Geneva University
Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.

Xpert MTB/RIF assay, a real-time PCR assay designed to detect Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, has proven sensitive and specific when performed on respiratory
samples in a high prevalence setting. However, it was suggested as less accurate 
in a low-incidence environment. We evaluated the accuracy of the Xpert for the
diagnosis of tuberculosis (TB) on pulmonary and extrapulmonary samples in Geneva 
(Switzerland), where the prevalence of active TB is very low. From March 2009 to 
February 2013, the Xpert was performed on clinical samples. All specimens were
also processed using auramine, AFB staining, and mycobacterial culture with both 
solid and liquid media. The accuracy of both microscopy and Xpert was determined 
retrospectively using cultures as the reference method. A total of 732 clinical
specimens were processed with the Xpert. The Xpert had a high specificity (97.5%;
95% confidence interval (CI), 95.8-98.5%) and revealed much more sensitive
(82.7%; 95% CI, 74.1-89.0%) than microscopy (55.5%; 95% CI, 45.7-64.8%) for the
diagnosis of TB, with a high negative predictive value (96.8%; 95% CI,
95.0-98.0%). The advantage of PCR over microscopy was even more pronounced for
extrapulmonary specimens (sensitivity of 70% (95% CI, 50.4-84.6%) compared with
23.3% (95% CI, 10.6-42.7%)). Despite the low prevalence of TB in Switzerland,
results performance for respiratory samples was similar to that reported in high 
prevalence countries. The high negative predictive value is clinically helpful in
our setting, where pulmonary TB needs to be reasonably ruled out. When
considering extrapulmonary samples, microscopy performed poorly compared with
Xpert. This study shows that the Xpert remains accurate and useful in a
low-incidence setting.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-020-03887-8 
PMID: 32306143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

