
1. Harmful Algae. 2020 Mar;93:101777. doi: 10.1016/j.hal.2020.101777. Epub 2020 Mar 
10.

Comparative transcriptomics of toxin synthesis genes between the non-toxin
producing dinoflagellate Cochlodinium polykrikoides and toxigenic Alexandrium
pacificum.

Wang H(1), Guo R(2), Lim WA(3), Allen AE(4), Ki JS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Sangmyung University, Seoul 03016, South Korea.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Sangmyung University, Seoul 03016, South Korea;
Key Laboratory of Marine Ecosystem and Biogeochemistry, State Oceanic
Administration & Second Institute of Oceanography, Ministry of Natural Resources,
PR China.
(3)Ocean Climate and Ecology Research Division, National Institute of Fisheries
Science (NIFS), Busan 46083, South Korea.
(4)Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego, CA
92093, USA; Microbial and Environmental Genomics Group, J. Craig Venter
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Sangmyung University, Seoul 03016, South Korea.
Electronic address: kijs@smu.ac.kr.

In the present study, we extensively characterized potential toxin-related genes,
including polyketide synthase (PKS), saxitoxin (STX) and fatty acid synthase
(FAS) from the non-toxin producing marine dinoflagellate Cochlodinium
polykrikoides, comparing to those of a toxigenic dinoflagellate Alexandrium
pacificum. RNA sequencing revealed 50 and 271 PKS contigs from C. polykrikoides
and A. pacificum, respectively. According to domain constitute and amino acid
alteration, we further classified the dinoflagellate type I PKS genes into 4
sub-groups. Type III PKS was first identified in C. polykrikoides. Interestingly,
we detected a large number (242 and 288) of homologs of 18 sxt genes from two
studied dinoflagellates. Most of the eight key genes (sxtA, sxtB, sxtD, sxtG,
sxtH/T, sxtI, sxtS and sxtU) for STX synthesis were detected in both
dinoflatellates, whereas a core STX biosynthesis gene sxtG was not detected in C.
polykrikoides. This may partially explain the absence of saxitoxin production in 
C. polykrikoides. In addition, we identified several type I and type II FAS
genes, including FabD, FabF, FabG, FabH, FabI, and FabZ, whereas FabB was not
found in C. polykrikoides. Overall, the numbers of the toxin-related genes in C. 
polykrikoides were less than that of A. pacificum. Phylogenetic analyses showed
that type I PKS/FASs of dinoflagellates had close relationships with
apicomplexans and bacteria. These suggest that the toxin-related PKS and sxt
genes are commonly present in toxigenic and non-toxin producing dinoflagellates, 
and may be involved not only in the toxin synthesis, but also in other related
molecular metabolic functions.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hal.2020.101777 
PMID: 32307068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

