
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2020 Jun;60(6):517-531. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201900626. Epub 2020
Apr 17.

Study on the correlation between soil microbial diversity and ambient
environmental factors influencing the safflower distribution in Xinjiang.

Liu Y(1), Zhang X(2), Yang ML(2), Wang SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Agriculture, Shihezi University, Shihezi, Xinjiang, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Shihezi University, Shihezi, Xinjiang, China.

The effects of soil microbial properties and physiographical factors on safflower
distributions in the main safflower plantations of Xinjiang province in China
were studied. This study may help determine the basis of the environmental
factors for evaluating the geoherbalism of this medicinal plant. The soil
microbial biodiversity in the bulk soil and rhizosphere of safflower at different
growth stages and from different sampling plots were characterized by analyzing
the environmental DNAs in the samples. With general primers targeting the 16S
ribosomal DNA for bacteria and the internal transcribed spacer 1 gene for fungi, 
the study was performed using marker gene amplification coupled with Illumina
HiSeq high-throughput sequencing technologies. Correlation analysis and a
distance-based redundancy analysis were performed to determine the dominant
factors affecting the distribution of the microorganism in safflower soils. A
total of 16517 bacterial operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were obtained from
all the 108 soil samples of nine safflower sampling plots. At the phylum level,
48 phyla have been identified with Actinobacteria (32.9%) and proteobacteria
(28.7%) being predominant. For fungi, 8746 OTUs were obtained, which belonged to 
seven phyla with Ascomycota overwhelmingly superior in relative abundance. A
significant positive correlation was found between soil microbe quantity and ASL 
(above sea level). Safflower was sensitive to changes in elevation, growing more 
abundantly in the mountainous regions at heights of around 1,200 m above sea
level. It is concluded that the dominant factors affecting the distribution of
microorganisms in safflower soils were soil moisture, available N, and ASL.

© 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201900626 
PMID: 32301140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

