
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Apr 17;21(8). pii: E2818. doi: 10.3390/ijms21082818.

Identification of the Key Molecular Drivers of Phosphorus Utilization Based on
Host miRNA-mRNA and Gut Microbiome Interactions.

Ponsuksili S(1), Reyer H(1), Hadlich F(1), Weber F(1), Trakooljul N(1), Oster
M(1), Siengdee P(1), Mur√°ni E(1), Rodehutscord M(2), Camarinha-Silva A(2),
Bennewitz J(2), Wimmers K(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Farm Animal Biology (FBN), 18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.
(2)Institute of Animal Science, University of Hohenheim, 70599 Stuttgart,
Germany.
(3)Faculty of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, University Rostock, 18059 
Rostock, Germany.

Phosphorus is an essential mineral for all living organisms and a limited
resource worldwide. Variation and heritability of phosphorus utilization (PU)
traits were observed, indicating the general possibility of improvement.
Molecular mechanisms of PU, including host and microbial effects, are still
poorly understood. The most promising molecules that interact between the
microbiome and host are microRNAs. Japanese quail representing extremes for PU
were selected from an F2 population for miRNA profiling of the ileal tissue and
subsequent association with mRNA and microbial data of the same animals.
Sixty-nine differentially expressed miRNAs were found, including 21 novel and 48 
known miRNAs. Combining miRNAs and mRNAs based on correlated expression and
target prediction revealed enrichment of transcripts in functional pathways
involved in phosphate or bone metabolism such as RAN, estrogen receptor and Wnt
signaling, and immune pathways. Out of 55 genera of microbiota, seven were found 
to be differentially abundant between PU groups. The study reveals molecular
interactions occurring in the gut of quail which represent extremes for PU
including miRNA-16-5p, miR-142b-5p, miR-148a-3p, CTDSP1, SMAD3, IGSF10,
Bacteroides, and Alistipes as key indicators due to their trait-dependent
differential expression and occurrence as hub-members of the network of molecular
drivers of PU.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21082818 
PMCID: PMC7215353
PMID: 32316683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

