
1. Genes (Basel). 2020 Apr 16;11(4). pii: E432. doi: 10.3390/genes11040432.

The Peptidoglycan Biosynthesis Gene murC in Frankia: Actinorhizal vs. Plant Type.

Berckx F(1), Wibberg D(2), Kalinowski J(2), Pawlowski K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Environment, and Plant Sciences, Stockholm University, 
10691 Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Center for Biotechnology (CeBiTec), Bielefeld University, 33615 Bielefeld,
Germany.

Nitrogen-fixing Actinobacteria of the genus Frankia can be subdivided into four
phylogenetically distinct clades; members of clusters one to three engage in
nitrogen-fixing root nodule symbioses with actinorhizal plants. Mur enzymes are
responsible for the biosynthesis of the peptidoglycan layer of bacteria. The four
Mur ligases, MurC, MurD, MurE, and MurF, catalyse the addition of a short
polypeptide to UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid. Frankia strains of cluster-2 and
cluster-3 contain two copies of murC, while the strains of cluster-1 and
cluster-4 contain only one. Phylogenetically, the protein encoded by the murC
gene shared only by cluster-2 and cluster-3, termed MurC1, groups with MurC
proteins of other Actinobacteria. The protein encoded by the murC gene found in
all Frankia strains, MurC2, shows a higher similarity to the MurC proteins of
plants than of Actinobacteria. MurC2 could have been either acquired via
horizontal gene transfer or via gene duplication and convergent evolution, while 
murC1 was subsequently lost in the cluster-1 and cluster-4 strains. In the
nodules induced by the cluster-2 strains, the expression levels of murC2 were
significantly higher than those of murC1. Thus, there is clear sequence
divergence between both types of Frankia MurC, and Frankia murC1 is in the
process of being replaced by murC2, indicating selection in favour of murC2.
Nevertheless, protein modelling showed no major structural differences between
the MurCs from any phylogenetic group examined.

DOI: 10.3390/genes11040432 
PMCID: PMC7231273
PMID: 32316316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

