
1. Sci Total Environ. 2020 Jun 10;720:137514. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.137514. 
Epub 2020 Feb 29.

Acidification in corn monocultures favor fungi, ammonia oxidizing bacteria, and
nirK-denitrifier groups.

Behnke GD(1), Zabaloy MC(2), Riggins CW(1), Rodríguez-Zas S(3), Huang L(1),
Villamil MB(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois, Department of Crop Sciences, Turner Hall, 1102 S.
Goodwin Ave., Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
(2)Centro de Recursos Naturales Renovables de la Zona Semiárida (CERZOS),
Universidad Nacional del Sur (UNS) - CONICET, San Andrés 800, 8000 Bahía Blanca, 
Argentina.
(3)University of Illinois, Department of Animal Sciences, 30 ASL, 127 W. Gregory 
Dr., Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
(4)University of Illinois, Department of Crop Sciences, Turner Hall, 1102 S.
Goodwin Ave., Urbana, IL 61801, USA. Electronic address: villamil@illinois.edu.

Agricultural practices of no-till and crop rotations are critical to counteract
the detrimental effects of monocultures and tillage operations on ecosystem
services related to soil health such as microbial N cycling. The present study
explored the main steps of the microbial N cycle, using targeted gene abundance
as a proxy, and concerning soil properties, following 19 and 20 years of crop
monocultures and rotations of corn (Zea mays L.), and soybean [Glycine max (L.)
Merr.], either under no-till or chisel tillage. Real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) was implemented to estimate phylogenetic groups and
functional genes related to the microbial N cycle: nifH (N2 fixation), amoA
(nitrification) and nirK, nirS, and nosZ (denitrification). Our results indicate 
that long-term crop rotation and tillage decisions affect soil health as it
relates to soil properties and microbial parameters. No-till management increased
soil organic matter (SOM), decreased soil pH, and increased copy numbers of AOB
(ammonia oxidizing bacteria). Crop rotations with more corn increased SOM,
reduced soil pH, reduced AOA (ammonia oxidizing archaea) copy numbers, and
increased AOB and fungal ITS copy numbers. NirK denitrifier groups were also
enhanced under continuous corn. Altogether, the more corn years included in a
crop rotation multiplies the amount of N needed to sustain yield levels, thereby 
intensifying the N cycle in these systems, potentially leading to acidification, 
enhanced bacterial nitrification, and creating an environment primed for N losses
and increased N2O emissions.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.137514 
PMID: 32325572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

