
1. Cells. 2020 Apr 21;9(4). pii: E1030. doi: 10.3390/cells9041030.

Sphingosine Kinase Blockade Leads to Increased Natural Killer T Cell Responses to
Mantle Cell Lymphoma.

Lee MS(1)(2), Sun W(1)(2), Webb TJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Despite being responsive to combination chemotherapy, median survival remains
around 5 years due to high rates of relapse. Sphingolipid metabolism regulates
MCL survival and proliferation and we found that sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is
upregulated in MCL cells. Therapeutic targeting of the S1P1 receptor or knockdown
of sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1), the enzyme responsible for generating S1P, in
human MCL cells results in a significant increase in Natural Killer T (NKT) cell 
activation. NKT cells recognize glycolipid antigens presented on CD1d and can
reduce MCL tumor burden in vivo. Lipidomic studies identified cardiolipin, which 
has been reported to bind to CD1d molecules, as being upregulated in SK1
knockdown cells. We found that the pretreatment of antigen presenting cells with 
cardiolipin leads to increased cytokine production by NKT cell hybridomas.
Furthermore, the ability of cardiolipin to activate NKT cells was dependent on
the structure of its acyl chains. Collectively, these studies delineate novel
pathways important for immune recognition of malignant cells and could lead to
the development of new treatments for lymphoma.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9041030 
PMCID: PMC7226300
PMID: 32326225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

