
1. PeerJ. 2020 Apr 13;8:e8948. doi: 10.7717/peerj.8948. eCollection 2020.

Response of organic carbon mineralization and bacterial communities to soft rock 
additions in sandy soils.

Guo Z(1)(2)(3)(4), Han J(1)(2)(3)(4), Li J(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shaanxi Provincial Land Engineering Construction Group Co., Ltd., Xi'an,
Shaanxi, China.
(2)Institute of Land Engineering and Technology, Shaanxi Provincial Land
Engineering Construction Group Co., Ltd., Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Degraded and Unused Land Consolidation Engineering, the
Ministry of Natural and Resources of China, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(4)Shaanxi Provincial Land Consolidation Engineering Technology Research Center, 
Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

Bacteria play a vital role in biotransformation of soil organic carbon (SOC).
However, mechanisms of bacterium and organic carbon mineralization remain unclear
during improvement of sandy soil using soft rock additions. In this study, four
treatments with differing ratios of soft rock to sand of 0:1 (CK), 1:5 (C1), 1:2 
(C2) and 1:1 (C3) were selected for mineralization incubation and high-throughput
sequencing. The results showed that SOC, total nitrogen (TN), available
phosphorus (AP), nitrate nitrogen (NO 3 - -N), and mass water content (WC) of
sandy soil increased significantly after addition of soft rock (P < 0.05).
Compared with the CK treatment, cumulative mineralization and potential
mineralized organic carbon content of C1, C2 and C3 increased by 71.79%-183.86%
and 71.08%-173.33%. The cumulative mineralization rates of organic carbon treated
with C1 and C2 were lower, 16.96% and 17.78%, respectively (P > 0.05). The three 
dominant bacteria were Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria and Chloroflexi, among
which Proteobacteria was negatively correlated with mineralization of organic
carbon (P < 0.01). The mineralization rate constant (k) was positively correlated
and negatively correlated with Cyanobacteria and Nitrospirae, respectively. Under
C2 treatment, Proteobacteria and Nitrospirae had the largest increase, and
Cyanobacteria had the largest decrease. Compared with other treatments, C2
treatment significantly increased bacterial diversity index, richness index and
evenness index, and the richness index had a negative correlation with k value.
In conclusion, when the ratio of soft rock to sand was 1:2, the k of SOC could be
reduced. In addition, the retention time of SOC can be increased, and resulting
carbon fixation was improved.

©2020 Guo et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.8948 
PMCID: PMC7161572
PMID: 32322443 

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are employed by Shaanxi Provincial
Land Engineering Construction Group Co., Ltd., and all authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.

