
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 Jun;104(12):5385-5393. doi:
10.1007/s00253-020-10610-2. Epub 2020 Apr 27.

CRISPRi/dCpf1-mediated dynamic metabolic switch to enhance butenoic acid
production in Escherichia coli.

Ji X(1)(2), Zhao H(1)(2), Zhu H(3), Zhu K(1), Tang SY(4)(5), Lou C(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Microbial Physiological and Metabolic Engineering, State
Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
100049, China.
(3)Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 1068 Xueyuan Avenue, University Town, Nanshan,
Shenzhen, 518055, People's Republic of China.
(4)CAS Key Laboratory of Microbial Physiological and Metabolic Engineering, State
Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China. tangsy@im.ac.cn.
(5)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
100049, China. tangsy@im.ac.cn.

Butenoic acid is a short-chain unsaturated fatty acid and important precursor for
pharmaceutical and other applications. Heterologous thioesterases are able to
convert a fatty acid biosynthesis intermediate in Escherichia coli to butenoic
acid. In order to acquire high titer and yield of the product, dynamically
switching the metabolic flux from fatty acid biosynthesis pathway to butenoic
acid is critical after achieving enough cell mass of the host. A previous
developed switch for butenoic acid fermentation is based on triclosan molecule as
the FabI inhibitor in the fatty acid biosynthesis cycle. However, triclosan is
toxic to human, which may limit its pharmaceutical application. Alternatively, we
here purposed a nontoxic switch of carbon flux by harnessing recently developed
CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) approach. In our work, we constructed a
CRISPRi/dCpf1-mediated dynamic metabolic switch to separate the host growth and
production phase via switching the expression of the fabI gene in fatty acid
biosynthesis pathway. After optimizing the programmable targets, the
CRISPRi-based switch boosted the titer of butenoic acid by 6-fold (1.41 g/L) in
fed-batch fermentation. Our work supported that the CRISPRi/dCpf1 switch could
replace triclosan-based switch as a nontoxic switch for butenoic acid production,
and outcompeted the later switch in the biomass accumulation of the host cell.
Moreover, the CRISPRi/dCpf1 system was integrated into the chromosome of the host
to improve its genetic stability for long-term fermentation and other
applications.Key Points• A programmable metabolic switch was developed to replace
the toxic chemical switch to separate the growth phase and production phase of
the butenoic acid.• The programmable CRISPRi/dCpf1 switch was efficiently and
stably integrated into the host genome to increase their genetic stability during
fermentation.• The optimized metabolic switch simultaneously increased the host
biomass and butenoic acid titer, and solved the paradox of the competition
between growth and production.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-10610-2 
PMID: 32338294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

