
1. ACS Omega. 2020 Apr 13;5(15):8982-8991. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.0c00793.
eCollection 2020 Apr 21.

Novel Paclitaxel Nanoformulation Impairs De Novo Lipid Synthesis in Pancreatic
Cancer Cells and Enhances Gemcitabine Efficacy.

Shetty A(1), Nagesh PKB(1)(2), Setua S(1), Hafeez BB(1)(2)(3), Jaggi M(1)(2)(3), 
Yallapu MM(1)(2)(3), Chauhan SC(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Center for Cancer Research,
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, 38163 Tennessee, United
States.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of
Texas Rio Grande Valley, McAllen, 78539 Texas, United States.
(3)South Texas Center of Excellence in Cancer Research, School of Medicine,
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, McAllen, 78539 Texas, United States.

Pancreatic cancer (PanCa) is a highly lethal disease with a poor 5 year survival 
rate, less than 7%. It has a dismal prognosis, and more than 50% of cases are
detected at an advanced and metastatic stage. Gemcitabine (GEM) is a gold
standard chemotherapy used for PanCa treatment. However, GEM-acquired resistance 
in cancer cells is considered as a major setback for its continued clinical
implementation. This phenomenon is evidently linked to de novo lipid synthesis.
PanCa cells rely on de novo lipid synthesis, which is a prime event in survival
and one of the key drivers for tumorigenesis, cancer progression, and drug
resistance. Thus, the depletion of lipogenesis or lipid metabolism can not only
improve treatment outcomes but also overcome chemoresistance, which is an unmet
clinical need. Toward this effort, our study reports a unique
paclitaxel-poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles (PPNPs) formulation
which can target lipid metabolism and improve anticancer efficacy of GEM in PanCa
cells. PPNPs inhibit excessive lipid formation and alter membrane stability with 
compromised membrane integrity, which was confirmed by Fourier transform infrared
and zeta potential measurements. The effective interference of PPNPs in lipid
metabolic signaling was determined by reduction in the expression of FASN, ACC,
lipin, and Cox-2 proteins. This molecular action profoundly enhances efficacy of 
GEM as evident through enhanced inhibitory effects on the tumorigenic and
metastasis assays in PanCa cells. These data clearly suggest that the ablation of
lipid metabolism might offer an innovative approach for the improved therapeutic 
outcome in PanCa patients.

Copyright Â© 2020 American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.0c00793 
PMCID: PMC7178800
PMID: 32337462 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

