
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2477-2486. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa093.

Mutations Upstream of the TBX5 and PITX1 Transcription Factor Genes Are
Associated with Feathered Legs in the Domestic Chicken.

Li J(1)(2), Lee M(1), Davis BW(1), Lamichhaney S(3), Dorshorst BJ(2), Siegel
PB(2), Andersson L(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
(2)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, Blacksburg, VA.
(3)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Feathered leg is a trait in domestic chickens that has undergone intense
selection by fancy breeders. Previous studies have shown that two major loci
controlling feathered leg are located on chromosomes 13 and 15. Here, we present 
genetic evidence for the identification of candidate causal mutations at these
loci. This was accomplished by combining classical linkage mapping using an
experimental cross segregating for feathered leg and high-resolution
identical-by-descent mapping using whole-genome sequence data from 167 samples of
chicken with or without feathered legs. The first predicted causal mutation is a 
single-base change located 25 kb upstream of the gene for the forelimb-specific
transcription factor TBX5 on chromosome 15. The second is a 17.7-kb deletion
located ∼200 kb upstream of the gene for the hindlimb-specific transcription
factor PITX1 on chromosome 13. These mutations are predicted to activate TBX5 and
repress PITX1 expression, respectively. The study reveals a remarkable
convergence in the evolution of the feathered-leg phenotype in domestic chickens 
and domestic pigeons, as this phenotype is caused by noncoding mutations upstream
of the same two genes. Furthermore, the PITX1 causal variants are large
overlapping deletions, 17.7 kb in chicken and 44 kb in pigeons. The results of
the present study are consistent with the previously proposed model for pigeon
that feathered leg is caused by reduced PITX1 expression and ectopic expression
of TBX5 in hindlimb buds resulting in a shift of limb identity from hindlimb to
more forelimb-like identity.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa093 
PMCID: PMC7475036
PMID: 32344431 

