
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2020 Jun 19;15(6):1497-1504. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.0c00142. Epub
2020 May 13.

Structure-Guided Biochemical Analysis of Quorum Signal Synthase Specificities.

Dong SH, Nhu-Lam M(1), Nagarajan R(1), Nair SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Boise State University, Boise,
Idaho, United States.

Many bacteria use membrane-diffusible small molecule quorum signals to coordinate
gene transcription in response to changes in cell density, known as quorum
sensing (QS). Among these, acyl-homoserine lactones (AHL) are widely distributed 
in Proteobacteria and are involved in controlling the expression of virulence
genes and biofilm formation in pathogens, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa. AHL
molecules are specifically biosynthesized by the cognate LuxI type AHL synthases 
using S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) and either acyl carrier protein (ACP)- or
CoA-coupled fatty acids through a two-step reaction. Here, we characterize a
CoA-dependent LuxI synthase from Rhodopseudomonas palustris that utilizes an
aryl-CoA substrate that is environmentally derived, specifically p-coumaric acid.
We leverage structures of this aryl-CoA-dependent synthase, along with our prior 
studies of an acyl-CoA-dependent synthase, to identify residues that confer
substrate chain specificity in these enzymes. We test our predictions by carrying
out biochemical, kinetic, and structural characterization of representative AHL
signal synthases. Our studies provide an understanding of various AHL synthases
that may be deployed in synthetic biological applications and inform on the
design of specific small molecule therapeutics that can restrict virulence by
targeting quorum signaling.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.0c00142 
PMCID: PMC8040520
PMID: 32356962 

