
1. Biomolecules. 2020 Apr 29;10(5). pii: E694. doi: 10.3390/biom10050694.

Assessment of Fatty Acids Profile and Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
Production by the Oleaginous Marine Thraustochytrid Aurantiochytrium sp. T66
Cultivated on Volatile Fatty Acids.

Patel A(1), Rova U(1), Christakopoulos P(1), Matsakas L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemical Process Engineering, Division of Chemical Engineering, Department 
of Civil, Environmental, and Natural Resources Engineering, Luleå University of
Technology, SE-971 87 Luleå, Sweden.

Thraustochytrids are considered natural producers of omega-3 fatty acids as they 
can synthesize up to 70% docosahexaenoic acids (DHA) of total lipids. However,
commercial and sustainable production of microbial DHA is limited by elevated
cost of carbon substrates for thraustochytrids cultivation. This problem can be
addressed by utilizing low-cost renewable substrates. In the present study,
growth, lipid accumulation and fatty acid profiles of the marine thraustochytrid 
Aurantiochytrium sp. T66 (ATCC-PRA-276) cultivated on volatile fatty acids (C1,
formic acid; C2, acetic acid; C3, propionic acid; C4, butyric acid; C5, valeric
acid and C6, caproic acid) and glucose as control were evaluated for the first
time. This strain showed an inability to utilize C3, C5 and C6 as a substrate
when provided at >2 g/L, while efficiently utilizing C2 and C4 up to 40 g/L. The 
highest cell dry weight (12.35 g/L) and total lipid concentration (6.59 g/L) were
attained when this strain was cultivated on 40 g/L of butyric acid, followed by
cultivation on glucose (11.87 g/L and 5.34 g/L, respectively) and acetic acid
(8.70 g/L and 3.43 g/L, respectively). With 40 g/L butyric acid, the maximum
docosahexaenoic acid content was 2.81 g/L, corresponding to 42.63% w/w of total
lipids and a yield of 0.23 g/gcell dry weight (CDW). This marine oleaginous
microorganism showed an elevated potential for polyunsaturated fatty acids
production at higher acetic and butyric acid concentrations than previously
reported. Moreover, fluorescence microscopy revealed that growth on butyric acid 
caused cell size to increase to 45 µm, one of the largest values reported for
oleaginous microorganisms, as well as the presence of numerous tiny lipid
droplets.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10050694 
PMCID: PMC7277355
PMID: 32365742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

