
1. ACS Synth Biol. 2020 May 15;9(5):981-986. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00432. Epub
2020 May 4.

Analyzing and Engineering the Product Selectivity of a 2-Methylenebornane
Synthase.

Kschowak MJ(1)(2), Maier F(1)(2), Wortmann H(1), Buchhaupt M(1).

Author information: 
(1)DECHEMA Research Institute, Industrial Biotechnology, Frankfurt am Main,
60486, Germany.
(2)Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Frankfurt
am Main, 60323, Germany.

Terpenes constitute the largest class of natural products with more than 70â€¯000
compounds. Many different terpenes find applications in the flavor and fragrance 
industry or can be used as fine chemicals or drugs. In some bacteria,
noncanonical terpenes with 11 carbon atoms are synthesized via a
GPP-C2-methyltransferase and the subsequent conversion of 2-methyl-GPP by certain
terpene synthases into mainly 2-methylisoborneol and 2-methylenebornane. Many
other C11-terpenes were reported as side products, but they are synthesized only 
in minor amounts by the bacterial C11-terpene biosynthesis pathway. To enable
biotechnological synthesis of these largely unexplored natural products, we
changed the product selectivity of the 2-methylenebornane synthase from
Pseudomonas fluorescens by a semirational protein engineering approach. Active
site amino acids with impact on the product selectivity were identified and
variants with completely altered product spectra could be identified and
characterized. The gathered data provide new insights into the structure-function
relationship for C11-terpene synthases and demonstrate the production of formerly
inaccessible noncanonical terpenes.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00432 
PMID: 32364702 

