
1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2020 Apr 30;9(5). pii: E373. doi: 10.3390/antiox9050373.

Phytochemical Profile and Biological Activities of Tendrils and Leaves Extracts
from a Variety of Vitis vinifera L.

Moldovan ML(1), Carpa R(2), Fizeșan I(3), Vlase L(4), Bogdan C(1), Iurian SM(4), 
Benedec D(5), Pop A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermopharmacy and Cosmetics, Faculty of Pharmacy, "Iuliu
Hațieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 12 I. Creangă Street, 400010
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology and
Geology, "Babeș-Bolyai" University, 1 M. Kogălniceanu Street, 400084 Cluj-Napoca,
Romania.
(3)Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, "Iuliu Hațieganu" University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, 6 L. Pasteur Street, 400349 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
"Iuliu Hațieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 41 V. Babeș Street, 400012
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(5)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, "Iuliu Hațieganu" University
of Medicine and Pharmacy, 12 I. Creangă Street, 400010 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.

Winery industry by-products have a great reuse potential in the pharmaceutical
and cosmetic fields due to their bioactive compounds. This study investigates the
phytochemical profile and the bioactivity of Vitis vinifera variety Fetească
neagră tendrils extract (TE) and leaves extract (LE), intended to be used in oral
hygiene products recommended in periodontal disease. The evaluation of the
phenolic content was performed by colorimetric analysis. Liquid chromatography
coupled with mass spectrometry was used to determine the chemical profile of the 
two extracts obtained from V. vinifera. Moreover, the antioxidant activity of the
extracts was determined by spectrophotometric methods, as well as on human
gingival fibroblasts (HGF) cell line. The cytocompatibility and cytoprotective
effect against nicotine-induced cytotoxicity were tested, as well as the
anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial effects. The TE showed higher total
polyphenolic content, rich in rutin, compared to the leaves extract that
displayed important amounts of isoquercitrin. The antioxidant effect was
confirmed by both non-cellular and cellular tests. The cytocompatibility of the
extracts was confirmed at a wide range of concentrations. The cytoprotective
effect was demonstrated in HGF exposed to cytotoxic doses of nicotine; 300 µg/mL 
of both tested extracts decreased nicotine toxicity by approximately 20%. When
challenged with E. coli polysaccharides, in HGF cells co-exposed to TE and LE, a 
reduction in the release of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-8, IL-6 and IL-1β) was 
observed. The extracts were both able to reduce the levels of reactive oxygen
species and inflammatory cytokines, and had notable antimicrobial effects on
pathogenic bacteria associated with periodontitis.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox9050373 
PMCID: PMC7278858
PMID: 32365793 

