
1. J Med Food. 2020 Jun;23(6):649-657. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2019.4603. Epub 2020 May 5.

Reduction of Halitosis by a Tablet Containing Weissella cibaria CMU: A
Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study.

Lee DS(1), Lee SA(1), Kim M(1), Nam SH(2), Kang MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Korea.
(2)Department of Dental Hygiene, School of Health Science, Kangwon National
University, Samcheok, Korea.
(3)R&D Department, Research Institute, OraPharm, Inc., Seoul, Korea.

Halitosis is referred to as an unpleasant odor coming from the mouth. Recently,
probiotics have been studied as an alternative prevention for halitosis. The aim 
of this study was to evaluate the effects of probiotic bacterium Weissella
cibaria Chonnam Medical University (CMU)-containing tablets (1 × 108 colony
forming units [CFU]/g) on oral malodor. The randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial was conducted in 92 healthy adults (20-39 years of age) 
with bad breath. All subjects were randomly assigned to a test (probiotic,
n = 49) or control (placebo, n = 43) group after dental scaling and root planing.
The tablets were taken once daily for 8 weeks. Measurements included an
organoleptic test (OLT), volatile sulfur compounds (VSC), bad breath improvement 
(BBI) scores, and the oral colonization of W. cibaria CMU. This study also
assessed safety variables of adverse reactions, vital signs, and the findings of 
hematology and blood chemistry. Most of the variables were measured at baseline, 
4, and 8 weeks. Safety-related variables were measured at baseline and 8 weeks.
At week 4, a significant decrease in OLT and VSC results was observed in the test
group while BBI scores were significantly reduced at week 8 (P < .05).
Statistically significant intergroup differences were observed for changes in W. 
cibaria number at weeks 4 and 8. No safety issues were encountered in either
group. These results indicate that W. cibaria CMU tablets could be a safe and
useful oral care product for controlling bad breath.

DOI: 10.1089/jmf.2019.4603 
PMID: 32379992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

