
1. mBio. 2020 May 5;11(3). pii: e00180-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00180-20.

Systemic Inflammatory Mediators Are Effective Biomarkers for Predicting Adverse
Outcomes in Clostridioides difficile Infection.

Dieterle MG(1)(2), Putler R(3), Perry DA(3), Menon A(3), Abernathy-Close L(2),
Perlman NS(3), Penkevich A(3), Standke A(3), Keidan M(3), Vendrov KC(3), Bergin
IL(4), Young VB(2)(3), Rao K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(3)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA.
(5)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA krirao@med.umich.edu.

Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) can result in severe disease and death, 
with no accurate models that allow for early prediction of adverse outcomes. To
address this need, we sought to develop serum-based biomarker models to predict
CDI outcomes. We prospectively collected sera ≤48 h after diagnosis of CDI in two
cohorts. Biomarkers were measured with a custom multiplex bead array assay.
Patients were classified using IDSA severity criteria and the development of
disease-related complications (DRCs), which were defined as ICU admission,
colectomy, and/or death attributed to CDI. Unadjusted and adjusted models were
built using logistic and elastic net modeling. The best model for severity
included procalcitonin (PCT) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) with an area
(AUC) under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of 0.74 (95%
confidence interval, 0.67 to 0.81). The best model for 30-day mortality included 
interleukin-8 (IL-8), PCT, CXCL-5, IP-10, and IL-2Rα with an AUC of 0.89 (0.84 to
0.95). The best model for DRCs included IL-8, procalcitonin, HGF, and IL-2Rα with
an AUC of 0.84 (0.73 to 0.94). To validate our models, we employed experimental
infection of mice with C. difficile Antibiotic-treated mice were challenged with 
C. difficile and a similar panel of serum biomarkers was measured. Applying each 
model to the mouse cohort of severe and nonsevere CDI revealed AUCs of 0.59 (0.44
to 0.74), 0.96 (0.90 to 1.0), and 0.89 (0.81 to 0.97). In both human and murine
CDI, models based on serum biomarkers predicted adverse CDI outcomes. Our results
support the use of serum-based biomarker panels to inform Clostridioides
difficile infection treatment.IMPORTANCE Each year in the United States,
Clostridioides difficile causes nearly 500,000 gastrointestinal infections that
range from mild diarrhea to severe colitis and death. The ability to identify
patients at increased risk for severe disease or mortality at the time of
diagnosis of C. difficile infection (CDI) would allow clinicians to effectively
allocate disease modifying therapies. In this study, we developed models
consisting of only a small number of serum biomarkers that are capable of
predicting both 30-day all-cause mortality and adverse outcomes of patients at
time of CDI diagnosis. We were able to validate these models through experimental
mouse infection. This provides evidence that the biomarkers reflect the
underlying pathophysiology and that our mouse model of CDI reflects the
pathogenesis of human infection. Predictive models can not only assist clinicians
in identifying patients at risk for severe CDI but also be utilized for targeted 
enrollment in clinical trials aimed at reduction of adverse outcomes from severe 
CDI.

Copyright © 2020 Dieterle et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00180-20 
PMCID: PMC7403776
PMID: 32371595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

