
1. Int J Indig Health. 2019 Oct 31;14(2):205-221. doi: 10.32799/ijih.v14i2.31920.
Epub 2019 Aug 13.

HPV Knowledge and Attitudes Among American Indian and Alaska Native Health and
STEM Conference Attendees.

Lee NR(1), Noonan CJ(2), Nelson L(2), Umans JG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM, USA. Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, AZ, USA.
(2)Partnerships for Native Health, Initiative for Research and Education to
Advance Community Health, College of Nursing, Washington State University,
Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)MedStar Health Research Institute, Hyattsville, MD, USA. Georgetown-Howard
Universities Center for Clinical and Translational Science, Washington, DC, USA.

American Indian and Alaska Native women had approximately twice the incidence of 
cervical cancer as white women. Preventive measures for cervical cancer rely on
screening and HPV vaccination. However, vaccine series completion and catch-up
vaccinations for eligible adults are low across all racial/ethnic groups.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to identify gaps in knowledge and evaluate
the attitudes toward HPV and the vaccine among AIANs with various levels of
training in the STEM and health-related fields. A survey was used to collect data
from audience members at two national conferences geared towards American Indian 
and Alaska Natives in health and STEM fields in September 2017. A vignette study 
was administered via a live electronic poll to test knowledge (true/false
questions), attitudes, and to collect demographic information. Respondents
self-identified as primarily American Indian and Alaska Native (74%), pursuing or
completed a graduate degree (67%), and female (85%). Most respondents (86%) were 
aware of HPV-associated cancer in men. However, most (48-90%) answered
incorrectly to detailed true/false statements about HPV and available vaccines.
After educational information was provided, opinions collected via vignettes
highlighted mainly positive attitudes toward vaccination; specifically, that
vaccines are safe and all eligible community members should be vaccinated (75%
and 84%, respectively). We observed that our respondents with higher educational 
attainment still lacked accurate knowledge pertaining to HPV and the vaccine.
Overall, continued education about HPV and the vaccine is needed across all
levels of education including American Indian and Alaska Native community members
and health professionals.

DOI: 10.32799/ijih.v14i2.31920 
PMCID: PMC7199482
PMID: 32373556 

