
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 May 7;21(9). pii: E3303. doi: 10.3390/ijms21093303.

The Role of Gut Microbiome in Psoriasis: Oral Administration of Staphylococcus
aureus and Streptococcus danieliae Exacerbates Skin Inflammation of
Imiquimod-Induced Psoriasis-Like Dermatitis.

Okada K(1), Matsushima Y(1), Mizutani K(1), Yamanaka K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-174
Edobashi, Tsu, Mie 514-8507, Japan.

Psoriasis is one of the common chronic inflammatory skin diseases in which
inflammatory cytokines such as IL-17 and TNF-α play critical roles. Skin
microbiome of psoriasis patients is reported to have elevated Staphylococcus and 
Streptococcus genus. There are controversial reports about gut microbiome of
psoriasis patients, and whether the diversity of bacteria in genus level is
decreased or not is still unclear. Moreover, it is not yet known if these gut
bacteria would be the cause of the inflammation or the result of the
inflammation. We analyzed the gut microbiome of the inflammatory skin model mouse
(keratinocyte-specific caspase-1 transgenic (Kcasp1Tg) mouse), by analyzing the
16S rRNA gene. Staphylocuccus aureus and Streptococcus danieliae were abundant in
Kcasp1Tg mouse fecal microbiome. These dominant bacteria as well as recessive
control bacteria were orally administrated to antibiotic-treated wild type mice, 
and set up imiquimod-induced psoriasis-like skin inflammation model. The skin
inflammation including ear thickness and histopathological findings was analyzed.
The exacerbated skin lesions with the elevated levels of TNF-α, IL-17A, IL-17F,
and IL-22 were observed in Staphylocuccus aureus and Streptococcus danieliae
administrated groups. Our finding suggests that there is affinity between skin
inflammation severity and certain gut bacteria leading to a vicious cycle: skin
inflammation populates certain gut bacteria which itself worsens the skin
inflammation. This is the first report on Staphylocuccus aureus and
Streptococcuus danieliae effects in vivo. Not only treating the skin lesion but
also treating the gut microbiome could be the future key treatment for
inflammatory skin disease such as psoriasis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21093303 
PMCID: PMC7246652
PMID: 32392785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

