
1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2020 Jul 1;319(1):L105-L114. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00422.2019. Epub 2020 May 13.

Caspase-11 contributes to pulmonary host defense against Klebsiella pneumoniae
and local activation of coagulation.

Perlee D(1)(2), de Beer R(1)(2), Florquin S(3), van der Poll T(1)(2)(4), van 't
Veer C(1)(2), de Vos AF(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam Infection and Immunity Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam University Medical Centers,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Klebsiella (K.) pneumoniae is a common cause of gram-negative pneumonia and
sepsis. Caspase-11 is an intracellular receptor for lipopolysaccharide and
regulates pyroptosis, a specific form of inflammatory cell death, which aids in
host defense against intracellular gram-negative bacteria. Recently, caspase-11
has also been implicated in blood coagulation. Previously, we found that local
fibrin formation contributes to protective immunity against Klebsiella infection 
of the lung. The aim of the present study was to determine the role of caspase-11
in host defense during K. pneumoniae-evoked pneumonia and sepsis. Therefore, we
infected wild-type and caspase-11-deficient (Casp11-/-) mice with a low-dose K.
pneumoniae via the airways to induce a gradually evolving pneumosepsis. Casp11-/-
mice displayed increased bacterial numbers in the lung 12 h and 48 h after
inoculation. Analysis of pulmonary IL-1α, IL-1β, and TNF levels showed reduced
IL-1α levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and increased TNF levels in the lung
of Casp11-/- mice at 48 h after inoculation. Lung γH2AX staining (marker for cell
death), lung pathology and neutrophil influx in the lung, as well as bacterial
dissemination and organ damage, however, were not altered in Casp11-/- mice after
Klebsiella infection. Strikingly, analysis of cross-linked fibrin and D-dimer
(markers for coagulation) revealed significantly less fibrin formation in the
lungs of Casp11-/- mice at either time point after Klebsiella infection. These
data reveal that caspase-11 contributes to protective immunity against K.
pneumoniae possibly by activation of blood coagulation in the lung.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00422.2019 
PMID: 32401674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

