
1. Molecules. 2020 May 13;25(10). pii: E2295. doi: 10.3390/molecules25102295.

High Affinity Binding of N2-Modified Guanine Derivatives Significantly Disrupts
the Ligand Binding Pocket of the Guanine Riboswitch.

Matyjasik MM(1), Hall SD(1), Batey RT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, CO
80309, USA.

Riboswitches are important model systems for the development of approaches to
search for RNA-targeting therapeutics. A principal challenge in finding compounds
that target riboswitches is that the effector ligand is typically almost
completely encapsulated by the RNA, which severely limits the chemical space that
can be explored. Efforts to find compounds that bind the guanine/adenine class of
riboswitches with a high affinity have in part focused on purines modified at the
C6 and C2 positions. These studies have revealed compounds that have low to
sub-micromolar affinity and, in a few cases, have antimicrobial activity. To
further understand how these compounds interact with the guanine riboswitch, we
have performed an integrated structural and functional analysis of representative
guanine derivatives with modifications at the C8, C6 and C2 positions. Our data
indicate that while modifications of guanine at the C6 position are generally
unfavorable, modifications at the C8 and C2 positions yield compounds that rival 
guanine with respect to binding affinity. Surprisingly, C2-modified guanines such
as N2-acetylguanine completely disrupt a key Watson-Crick pairing interaction
between the ligand and RNA. These compounds, which also modulate transcriptional 
termination as efficiently as guanine, open up a significant new chemical space
of guanine modifications in the search for antimicrobial agents that target
purine riboswitches.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25102295 
PMCID: PMC7287874
PMID: 32414072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

