
1. Poult Sci. 2020 Jan;99(1):101-110. doi: 10.3382/ps/pez567. Epub 2019 Dec 30.

The effect of a selected yeast fraction on the prevention of pullorum disease and
fowl typhoid in commercial breeder chickens.

Zhou C(1), Liang J(1), Jiang W(2), He X(2), Liu S(1), Wei P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Poultry Science and Health, Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, 
Guangxi, China.
(2)Guangxi Hongguang Agricultural and Animal Husbandry Ltd, Rongxian 537500,
Guangxi, China.
(3)Institute for Poultry Science and Health, Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, 
Guangxi, China. Electronic address: pingwei8@126.com.

A selected yeast fraction (SYF) was tested for the purpose of preventing pullorum
disease and fowl typhoid in breeder chickens. In a challenge-protection
experiment, commercial Three-Yellow breeder chicks were initially divided into
groups A, B (challenged, treated), C (challenged, untreated), and D
(unchallenged, untreated). The group A diet was supplemented with SYF and group B
was supplemented with Acidipure via drinking water. At 7 D, birds of groups A, B,
and C were divided into 2 equal subgroups (A1-A2, B1-B2, and C1-C2). Subgroups
A1, B1, and C1 were challenged with Salmonella pullorum (SP), while subgroups A2,
B2, and C2 were challenged with Salmonella gallinarum (SG). Clinical signs and
mortality were recorded daily. At intervals, antibodies against SP and SG were
detected by a plate agglutinate test (PAT). At 42 D, all birds were weighed and
necropsied, lesions were recorded and challenge pathogens were isolated. Results 
showed that SP and SG isolation positive rates of groups A1-A2 were significantly
lower (P < 0.05) than those of B1-B2 and C1-C2, respectively. The average body
weight (BW) of groups A1-A2 was significantly higher (P < 0.05) than that of
B1-B2 and C1-C2, respectively. In the field trial, chicks were randomly divided
into 3 groups. Group 1 birds were fed a diet supplemented with SYF, group 2 diet 
was supplemented with Acidipure via drinking water, and group 3 was fed the same 
but un-supplemented diet as the control group. Antibodies against SP and SG were 
detected by PAT at 120 D. The antibodies positive rate of group 1 was
significantly lower (P < 0.05) than those of groups 2 and 3, while no significant
difference (P > 0.05) was found between groups 2 and 3. The results demonstrated 
that SYF supplementation could significantly decrease SP and SG infection rates, 
improve the BW of birds challenged with SP and SG, and was more effective than
Acidipure via drinking water.

Copyright Â© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3382/ps/pez567 
PMCID: PMC7587735
PMID: 32416790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

