
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 May 15;16(5):e1008572. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008572.
eCollection 2020 May.

Toxoplasma gondii dense granule protein GRA24 drives MyD88-independent p38 MAPK
activation, IL-12 production and induction of protective immunity.

Mercer HL(1), Snyder LM(1), Doherty CM(1), Fox BA(2), Bzik DJ(2), Denkers EY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Evolutionary and Theoretical Immunology and Department of Biology, 
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire, United States of America.

The apicomplexan Toxoplasma gondii induces strong protective immunity dependent
upon recognition by Toll-like receptors (TLR)11 and 12 operating in conjunction
with MyD88 in the murine host. However, TLR11 and 12 proteins are not present in 
humans, inspiring us to investigate MyD88-independent pathways of resistance.
Using bicistronic IL-12-YFP reporter mice on MyD88+/+ and MyD88-/- genetic
backgrounds, we show that CD11c+MHCII+F4/80- dendritic cells, F4/80+ macrophages,
and Ly6G+ neutrophils were the dominant cellular sources of IL-12 in both wild
type and MyD88 deficient mice after parasite challenge. Parasite dense granule
protein GRA24 induces p38 MAPK activation and subsequent IL-12 production in host
macrophages. We show that Toxoplasma triggers an early and late p38 MAPK
phosphorylation response in MyD88+/+ and MyD88-/- bone marrow-derived
macrophages. Using the uracil auxotrophic Type I T. gondii strain cps1-1, we
demonstrate that the late response does not require active parasite
proliferation, but strictly depends upon GRA24. By i. p. inoculation with cps1-1 
and cps1-1:Î”gra24, we identified unique subsets of chemokines and cytokines that 
were up and downregulated by GRA24. Finally, we demonstrate that cps1-1 triggers 
a strong host-protective GRA24-dependent Th1 response in the absence of MyD88.
Our data identify GRA24 as a major mediator of p38 MAPK activation, IL-12
induction and protective immunity that operates independently of the TLR/MyD88
cascade.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008572 
PMCID: PMC7255617
PMID: 32413093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

