
1. Sci Adv. 2020 Apr 29;6(18):eaaz5922. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aaz5922. eCollection
2020 May.

Effects of a deep-sea mining experiment on seafloor microbial communities and
functions after 26 years.

Vonnahme TR(1), Molari M(1), Janssen F(1)(2), Wenzhöfer F(1)(2), Haeckel M(3),
Titschack J(4)(5), Boetius A(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.
(2)HGF MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred Wegener Institute
for Polar and Marine Research in the Helmholtz Association, Bremerhaven, Germany.
(3)GEOMAR Helmholtz Center for Ocean Research Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(4)MARUM-Center for Marine Environmental Sciences, University of Bremen, Bremen, 
Germany.
(5)Senckenberg am Meer, Marine Research Department, Wilhelmshaven, Germany.

Future supplies of rare minerals for global industries with high-tech products
may depend on deep-sea mining. However, environmental standards for seafloor
integrity and recovery from environmental impacts are missing. We revisited the
only midsize deep-sea disturbance and recolonization experiment carried out in
1989 in the Peru Basin nodule field to compare habitat integrity,
remineralization rates, and carbon flow with undisturbed sites. Plough tracks
were still visible, indicating sites where sediment was either removed or
compacted. Locally, microbial activity was reduced up to fourfold in the affected
areas. Microbial cell numbers were reduced by ~50% in fresh "tracks" and by <30% 
in the old tracks. Growth estimates suggest that microbially mediated
biogeochemical functions need over 50 years to return to undisturbed levels. This
study contributes to developing environmental standards for deep-sea mining while
addressing limits to maintaining and recovering ecological integrity during
large-scale nodule mining.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0
(CC BY-NC).

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aaz5922 
PMCID: PMC7190355
PMID: 32426478 

