
1. Sci Rep. 2020 May 19;10(1):8218. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-65129-3.

Thymic resident NKT cell subsets show differential requirements for CD28
co-stimulation during antigenic activation.

Shissler SC(1), Singh NJ(1), Webb TJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Marlene and Stewart
Greenebaum Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Marlene and Stewart
Greenebaum Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. twebb@som.umaryland.edu.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells rapidly respond to antigenic stimulation with
cytokine production and direct cytotoxicity. These innate-like characteristics
arise from their differentiation into mature effector cells during thymic
development. A subset of mature NKT cells remain thymic resident, but their
activation and function remain poorly understood. We examined the roles of CD28
and CTLA-4 in driving the activation of thymic resident NKT cells. In contrast to
studies with peripheral NKT cells, the proliferation of thymic NKT cells was
significantly impaired when CD28 engagement was blocked, but unaffected by CTLA-4
activation or blockade. Within NKT subsets, however, stage 3 NKT cells, marked by
higher NK1.1 expression, were significantly more sensitive to the loss of CD28
signals compared to NK1.1- stage 2 NKT cells. In good agreement, CD28 blockade
suppressed NKT cell cytokine secretion, lowering the ratio of IFN-Î³:IL-4
production by NK1.1+ NKT cells. Intriguingly, the activation-dependent
upregulation of the master transcription factor PLZF did not require
CD28-costimulation in either of the thymic NKT subsets, underlining a dichotomy
between requirements for early activation vs subsequent proliferation and
effector function by these cells. Collectively, our studies demonstrate the
ability of CD28 co-stimulation to fine tune subset-specific responses by thymic
resident NKT cells and contextually shape the milieu in this primary lymphoid
organ.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-65129-3 
PMCID: PMC7237672
PMID: 32427927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

