
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2020 Jul 22;64(8). pii: e02351-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02351-19. Print 2020 Jul 22.

Extended-Spectrum-β-Lactamase- and Plasmid AmpC-Producing Escherichia coli
Causing Community-Onset Bloodstream Infection: Association of Bacterial Clones
and Virulence Genes with Septic Shock, Source of Infection, and Recurrence.

Fröding I(1)(2), Hasan B(3)(4), Sylvin I(2)(5), Coorens M(3)(2), Nauclér P(6)(7),
Giske CG(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
inga.froding@sll.se.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska University Laboratory,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Science for Life Laboratory, Solna, Sweden.
(6)Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

Invasive infections due to extended-spectrum-β-lactamase- and pAmpC-producing
Escherichia coli (ESBL/pAmpC-EC) are an important cause of morbidity, often
caused by the high-risk clone sequence type (ST131) and isolates classified as
extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli (ExPEC). The relative influence of host
immunocompetence versus microbiological virulence factors in the acquisition and 
outcome of bloodstream infections (BSI) is poorly understood. Herein, we used
whole-genome sequencing on 278 blood culture isolates of ESBL/pAmpC-EC from 260
patients with community-onset BSI collected from 2012 to 2015 in Stockholm to
study the association of virulence genes, sequence types, and antimicrobial
resistance with severity of disease, infection source, ESBL/pAmpC-EC BSI low-risk
patients, and patients with repeated episodes. ST131 subclade C2 comprised 29% of
all patients. Factors associated with septic shock in multivariable analysis were
patient host factors (hematologic cancer or transplantation and reduced daily
living activity), presence of the E. coli virulence factor iss (increased serum
survival), absence of phenotypic multidrug resistance, and absence of the genes
pap and hsp Adhesins, particularly pap, were associated with urinary tract
infection (UTI) source, while isolates from post-prostate biopsy sepsis had a low
overall number of virulence operons, including adhesins, and commonly belonged to
ST131 clades A, B, and subclade C1, ST1193, and ST648. ST131 was associated with 
recurrent episodes. In conclusion, the most interesting finding is the
association of iss with septic shock. Adhesins are important for UTI
pathogenesis, while otherwise low-pathogenic isolates from the microbiota can
cause post-prostate biopsy sepsis.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02351-19 
PMCID: PMC7526827
PMID: 32423949 

