
1. Front Immunol. 2020 May 5;11:797. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00797. eCollection
2020.

Single or Combined Dietary Supply of Psidium guajava and Phyllanthus amarus
Extracts Differentially Modulate Immune Responses and Liver Proteome in Striped
Catfish (Pangasianodon hyphophthalmus).

Nhu TQ(1)(2), Bich Hang BT(2), Cornet V(1), Oger M(1), Bach LT(3), Anh Dao NL(2),
Thanh Huong DT(2), Quetin-Leclercq J(4), Scippo ML(5), Phuong NT(2), Kestemont
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit in Environmental and Evolutionary Biology (URBE), Institute of
Life, Earth and Environment, University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.
(2)College of Aquaculture and Fisheries, Cantho University, Cantho City, Vietnam.
(3)College of Natural Sciences, Cantho University, Cantho City, Vietnam.
(4)Pharmacognosy Research Group, Louvain Drug Research Institute, Université
Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory of Food Analysis, Department of Food Sciences, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Fundamental and Applied Research for Animals & Health,
Veterinary Public Health, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

Guava Psidium guajava L (Pg) and bhumi amla Phyllanthus amarus Schum. et Thonn
(Pa) are well-known plants in traditional medicine. However, the capacity of
these plants for improving the immune system of aquatic species has received less
attention so far. This study aimed to investigate the effects of single supply or
mixture of Pg and Pa extracts on immune responses, disease resistance and liver
proteome profiles in striped catfish Pangasianodon hypophthalmus. Fish were fed
diets including basal diet 0% or one of three doses of each plant extract, either
alone or in mixture, 0.08, 0.2, or 0.5% Pg, Pa or mixture (Pg:Pa, v/v) for 6
weeks. The immune parameters (respiratory burst activity (RBA); nitric oxide
synthase (NOS), total immunoglobulin, lysozyme, and complement activities) were
examined at W3, W6 post-feeding, and after challenge test. The growth parameters 
and the challenge test with Edwardsiella ictaluri were done at W6. The liver
proteome profiles were analyzed in W6 at 0.08 and 0.5% of each extract. The
results showed that extract-based diets significantly improved growth parameters 
in the Pg0.2 group compared to control. The cellular immune responses in spleen
and the humoral immune responses in plasma were significantly improved in a dose 
and time-dependent manner. Diets supplemented with single Pg and Pa extracts, and
to lesser extent to combined extracts, could significantly decrease the mortality
of striped catfish following bacterial infection compared to control. The
proteomic results indicated that some pathways related to immune responses,
antioxidant and lipid metabolism were enriched in liver at W6. Several proteins
(i.e., CD8B, HSP90AA1, HSP90AB1, PDIA3, CASP8, TUBA1C, CCKAR, GNAS, GRIN2D,
PLCG1, PRKCA, SLC25A5, VDAC2, ACTN4, GNAI2, LCK, CARD9, NLRP12, and NLRP3) were
synergistically upregulated in mixture of Pg and Pa-based diets compared to
control and single dietary treatments. Taken together, the results revealed that 
single Pg and Pa extracts at 0.2 and 0.5% and their mixture at 0.08 and 0.5% have
the potential to modulate the immune mechanisms and disease resistance of striped
catfish. Moreover, the combination of Pg and Pa in diets suggested positive
synergistic effects liver proteome profile related to immune system processes.

Copyright © 2020 Nhu, Bich Hang, Cornet, Oger, Bach, Anh Dao, Thanh Huong,
Quetin-Leclercq, Scippo, Phuong and Kestemont.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00797 
PMCID: PMC7214933
PMID: 32431710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

