
1. Sci Total Environ. 2020 Sep 1;733:139306. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139306.
Epub 2020 May 11.

Exploring tet(X)-bearing tigecycline-resistant bacteria of swine farming
environments.

Li R(1), Peng K(1), Li Y(1), Liu Y(1), Wang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu
Province, PR China; Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of
Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou, Jiangsu Province, PR
China; Institute of Comparative Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 
Province, PR China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu
Province, PR China; Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of
Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou, Jiangsu Province, PR
China. Electronic address: zqwang@yzu.edu.cn.

Emergence of high-level tigecycline resistance tet(X) variants in animal and
human Enterobacterales is posing a public health concern. Recently, novel tet(X) 
variants including tet(X3), tet(X4), tet(X5) and tet(X6) were detected in
Enterobacterales and Acinetobacter baumannii. Here, we comprehensively
investigated the prevalence of tet(X) variants among different bacterial species 
in swine farm environment with nanopore sequencing. The tet(X6) gene was found
located on both plasmids and ICEs in Proteus, but tet(X4) was in plasmids in E.
coli. To our knowledge, this is the first report of the emergence of IncA/C2-type
plasmid-mediated tet(X6). The bacterial host adaptation of different tet(X)
variants implies they evolved in microbiota separately, but ISCR2 should be the
key element facilitating horizontal transfer of various tet(X) variants through
circular intermediates. Our findings further expand the knowledge about
reservoirs of mobile tigecycline resistance genes and the epidemic
characteristics of tet(X) variants in animals and related environments.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139306 
PMID: 32446072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

