
1. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2021 Feb;199(2):800-811. doi: 10.1007/s12011-020-02188-7.
Epub 2020 May 25.

Green Approach to Overcome the Resistance Pattern of Candida spp. Using
Biosynthesized Silver Nanoparticles Fabricated by Penicillium chrysogenum F9.

Soliman AM(1), Abdel-Latif W(1), Shehata IH(1), Fouda A(2), Abdo AM(3), Ahmed
YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
Ain-Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Department of Botany and Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar
University, 11884, Nasr City, Cairo, Egypt. amr_fh83@azhar.edu.eg.
(3)Department of Botany and Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar
University, 11884, Nasr City, Cairo, Egypt.

Candida species are the most common causative agents responsible for the majority
of morbidity as well as mortality rates due to invasive fungal infections
worldwide. In this study, a green approach was developed to control the
pathogenic Candida spp. isolated from clinical samples, and prior data
collections, ethics approval was obtained. Sixty candida isolates were obtained
from the different device-associated infections and identified as Candida
albicans, Candida tropicalis, Candida krusei, Candida parapsilosis, and Candida
glabrata with prevalence rates 41.6, 38.3, 8.3, 6.6, and 5%, respectively. On the
other hand, silver nanoparticles (Ag-NPs) were extra-cellular synthesized by
biomass filtrate of previously identified Penicillium chrysogenum strain F9. The 
physico-chemical characterizations of biosynthesized Ag-NPs were assessed by
using UV-Vis spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, X-ray
diffraction (XRD) patterns, transmission electron microscope (TEM), dynamic light
scattering (DIS), and zeta potential (ζ) analysis. Data revealed successful
synthesis of crystallographic spherical Ag-NPs with average size 18 to 60 nm at
maximum absorption peak 415 nm. FT-IR analysis confirmed the presence of
functional groups related to reduction, capping, and stabilizing Ag-NPs. The DLS 
analysis showed that NPs were homogenous and stable with poly-dispersity index
(PDI) and ζ value 0.008 and - 21 mV, respectively. Susceptibility pattern
analysis revealed that sixty Candida isolates (100%) were susceptible to Ag-NPs
as compared to 25 isolates (41.6%), and 30 isolates (50%) were susceptible to
fluconazole and amphotericin B, respectively. Interestingly, 30 Candida isolates 
(50%) were resistant to amphotericin B, which are more than those recorded for
fluconazole (17 isolates with percent 28.3%), while 18 candida isolates (30%)
were susceptible dose-dependent to fluconazole. The recorded minimum inhibitory
concentration 50/90 (MIC50/90) was 62.5/125, 16/64, and 1/4 for Ag-NPs,
fluconazole, and amphotericin B, respectively. However, green synthesized Ag-NPs 
can be used to overcome the resistance pattern of Candida spp., and recommended
as an anti-candida agent.

DOI: 10.1007/s12011-020-02188-7 
PMID: 32451695 

