
1. Eur J Immunol. 2020 Oct;50(10):1454-1467. doi: 10.1002/eji.201948416. Epub 2020
Jun 8.

Contribution of the SYK Tyrosine kinase expression to human iNKT self-reactivity.

Perroteau J(1), Navet B(1), Devilder MC(2), Hesnard L(1), Scotet E(1), Gapin
L(3), Saulquin X(1), Gautreau-Rolland L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Nantes, CNRS, Inserm, CRCINA, Nantes, France.
(2)Université de Nantes, CHU Nantes, CNRS, Inserm, CRCINA, Nantes, France.
(3)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.

Invariant Natural Killer T (iNKT) cells are particular T lymphocytes at the
frontier between innate and adaptative immunities. They participate in the
elimination of pathogens or tumor cells, but also in the development of allergic 
reactions and autoimmune diseases. From their first descriptions, the phenomenon 
of self-reactivity has been described. Indeed, they are able to recognize
exogenous and endogenous lipids. However, the mechanisms underlying the
self-reactivity are still largely unknown, particularly in humans. Using a CD1d
tetramer-based sensitive immunomagnetic approach, we generated self-reactive iNKT
cell lines from blood circulating iNKT cells of healthy donors. Analysis of their
functional characteristics in vitro showed that these cells recognized endogenous
lipids presented by CD1d molecules through their TCR that do not correspond to
α-glycosylceramides. TCR sequencing and transcriptomic analysis of T cell clones 
revealed that a particular TCR signature and an expression of the SYK protein
kinase were two mechanisms supporting human iNKT self-reactivity. The SYK
expression, strong in the most self-reactive iNKT clones and variable in ex vivo 
isolated iNKT cells, seems to decrease the activation threshold of iNKT cells and
increase their overall antigenic sensitivity. This study indicates that a
modulation of the TCR intracellular signal contributes to iNKT self-reactivity.

© 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201948416 
PMID: 32460359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

