
1. Arch Microbiol. 2020 Oct;202(8):2093-2103. doi: 10.1007/s00203-020-01927-7. Epub 
2020 Jun 3.

An evaluation of the core bacterial communities associated with hypersaline
environments in the Qaidam Basin, China.

Zhu D(1), Han R(2), Long Q(1), Gao X(1), Xing J(1), Shen G(1), Li Y(1), Wang
R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Basic Medical Science, Medical College, Qinghai University,
Xining, 810016, Qinghai, China.
(2)Qinghai Key Laboratory of Vegetable Genetics and Physiology, Academy of
Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Qinghai University, Xining, 810016, Qinghai,
China.
(3)Research Center of Basic Medical Science, Medical College, Qinghai University,
Xining, 810016, Qinghai, China. qhwr2007@163.com.

Hypersaline lakes and saltern areas are important industrial and biodiversity
resources in the Qaidam Basin of China that reside at > 2600 m asl. Most
hypersaline environments in this area are characterized by saturated salinity
(~ 300 g/L salinity), nearly neutral pH, intense ultraviolet radiation, and
extremely variable temperature fluctuations. The core bacterial communities
associated with these stressful environments have nevertheless remained
uninvestigated. 16S rRNA gene Illumina sequencing analyses revealed that the
bacterial communities were dominated by core lineages including the
Proteobacteria (39.4-64.6%) and the Firmicutes (17.0-42.7%). However, the
relative abundances of common lineages, and especially the five most abundant
taxa of Pseudomonas, Lactococcus, Anoxybacillus, Acinetobacter, and
Brevundimonas, were highly variable across communities and closely associated
with hypersaline characteristics in the samples. Network analysis revealed the
presence of co-occurrence high relative abundance taxa (cluster I) that were
highly correlated across all hypersaline samples. Additionally, temperature,
total organic carbon, K+, and Mg2+ correlated highest with taxonomic
distributions across communities. These results highlight the potential
mechanisms that could underlie survival and adaptation to these extreme
hypersaline ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-020-01927-7 
PMID: 32488562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

