
1. Front Immunol. 2020 May 19;11:874. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00874. eCollection
2020.

Dendritic Epidermal T Cells in Allergic Contact Dermatitis.

Mraz V(1), Geisler C(1), Bonefeld CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)The LEO Foundation Skin Immunology Research Center, Department of Immunology
and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is a common inflammatory skin disease with a
prevalence of approximately 20% in the European population. ACD is caused by
contact allergens that are reactive chemicals able to modify non-immunogenic
self-proteins to become immunogenic proteins. The most frequent contact allergens
are metals, fragrances, and preservatives. ACD clinically manifests as pruritic
eczematous lesions, erythema, local papules, and oedema. ACD is a T cell-mediated
disease, involving both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. In addition, γδ T cells appear to 
play an important role in the immune response to contact allergens. However, it
is debated whether γδ T cells act in a pro- or anti-inflammatory manner. A
special subset of γδ T cells, named dendritic epidermal T cells (DETC), is found 
in the epidermis of mice and it plays an important role in immunosurveillance of 
the skin. DETC are essential in sensing the contact allergen-induced stressed
environment. Thus, allergen-induced activation of DETC is partly mediated by
numerous allergen-induced stress proteins expressed on the keratinocytes (KC).
Several stress proteins, like mouse UL-16-binding protein-like transcript 1
(Mult-1), histocompatibility 60 (H60) and retinoic acid early inducible-1 (Rae-1)
α-ε family in mice and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
I-chain-related A (MICA) in humans, are upregulated on allergen-exposed KC.
Allergen-induced stress proteins expressed on the KC are consequently recognized 
by NKG2D receptor on DETC. This review focuses on the role of γδ T cells in ACD, 
with DETC in the spotlight, and on the role of stress proteins in contact
allergen-induced activation of DETC.

Copyright © 2020 Mraz, Geisler and Bonefeld.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00874 
PMCID: PMC7248261
PMID: 32508820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

