
1. HLA. 2020 Oct;96(4):445-455. doi: 10.1111/tan.13966. Epub 2020 Aug 4.

Specific donor HLA allotypes as predictors of cytomegalovirus disease risk in
acute myeloid leukemia.

Min GJ(1)(2), Kim HJ(1)(2), Kim TG(3)(4), Hyun YS(3), Hyun SJ(3), Baek IC(3)(4), 
Yoon SY(1)(2), Park SS(1)(2), Park S(1)(2), Yoon JH(1)(2), Lee SE(1)(2), Cho
BS(1)(2), Eom KS(1)(2), Kim YJ(1)(2), Lee S(1)(2), Min CK(1)(2), Cho SG(1), Kim
DW(1)(2), Lee JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Catholic Hematology Hospital, Seoul St.
Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(2)Leukemia Research Institute, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Catholic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Bank, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Some HLA alleles have been shown to be associated with susceptibility to
cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease incidence in vitro. The objective of this study was
to identify correlations between donor HLA allotypes and CMV disease incidence in
patients with acute myeloid leukemia who had undergone allogeneic hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Methods and materials we retrospectively
analyzed the medical records of 613 donors and recipients with acute myeloid
leukemia who had received an allogeneic HSCT from matched sibling (n = 260),
unrelated (n = 168), or haploidentical (n = 186) donors, from 2012 to 2017. The
HLA-A, -B, -C, and -DRB1 allotypes in the donors were determined using
sequence-based typing. Overall, CMV disease incidence was significantly
associated with three genotype alleles, HLA-A*30:04:01G, -B*51:01:01G, and
-DRB1*09:01:02G. In the donor CMV IgG seropositive subgroup, CMV disease
incidence was significantly associated with HLA-B*51:01:01G and -DRB1*09:01:02G. 
In the IgG seropositive donors in the unrelated allo-HSCT subgroup CMV disease
incidence was also significantly associated with HLA-B*51:01:01G. In the CMV
seropositive donors in the haploidentical allo-HSCT subgroup, the incidence of
CMV disease was significantly associated with HLA-A*24:02:01G and
-DRB1*09:01:02G. HLA-DRB1*13:02:01G was a protective marker among IgG
seropositive donors in the unrelated allo-HSCT recipient category. Discussion and
conclusions The incidence of CMV disease among HSCT recipients varies according
to donor HLA alleles and the donor CMV IgG serostatus. Certain donor HLA alleles 
can be considered to be risk or protective markers. Donors' HLA types and CMV IgG
serostatus should be considered in donor selection.

Â© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tan.13966 
PMID: 32506817 

