
1. J Pestic Sci. 2020 May 20;45(2):119-123. doi: 10.1584/jpestics.J19-06.

Study on the biodegradation of persistent organic pollutants (POPs).

Takagi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences, NARO, 3-1-3 Kannodai, Tsukuba-Shi, 
Ibaraki 305-8604, Japan.

The use of organochlorine pesticides, such as dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
(DDT) and benzene hexachloride (BHC), have contributed substantially to the
increase and stable supply of food production post-World War II. However, they
have also become a major source of pollution on a global scale due to their
persistence in the environment, high bioconcentration, toxicity, and their
long-distance mobility. Although the use and production of these pesticides were 
banned over 45 years ago, they still present a risk to human health and
ecosystems, and pose a threat to food safety. These pesticides were designated as
persistent organic pollutants (POPs) by the Stockholm Convention in 2001, which
urged the industry to reduce or eliminate them globally. The authors of this
study have been involved in the research and development of bioaugmentation soil 
remediation technology to reduce the risk of environmental and crop contamination
originating from POPs. In this paper, these studies are summarized, from basic
studies (1, 2, 3) to an applied study (4), as follows: (1) use of the
soil-charcoal perfusion method to explore POP-degrading bacteria, (2)
bacteriological characteristics, metabolic pathways and dechlorination genes of
the hexaclorobenzene (HCB)-mineralizing bacterial strain PD653, (3)
characteristics and metabolic pathways of the dieldrin-degrading bacterial strain
KSF27, and (4) application of these degrading bacteria for remediation of
POPs-contaminated soil.

Â© Pesticide Science Society of Japan 2020. This is an open access article
distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) License
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1584/jpestics.J19-06 
PMCID: PMC7251198
PMID: 32508519 

