
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2020 Jun;26(6):697-708. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2019.0351. Epub 2019
Dec 12.

Occurrence of ESBL-Producing Escherichia coli ST131, Including the H30-Rx and
C1-M27 Subclones, Among Urban Seagulls from the United Kingdom.

Zendri F(1), Maciuca IE(1), Moon S(2), Jones PH(3), Wattret A(1), Jenkins R(4),
Baxter A(5), Timofte D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology and Public Health, Faculty of Health and
Life Sciences, Institute of Veterinary Science, University of Liverpool, Neston, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Somerset West and Taunton Council, Environmental Health, Taunton, United
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Institute of Infection and
Global Health, University of Liverpool, Neston, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Allied Health Sciences, De Montfort University, Leicester, United
Kingdom.
(5)Birdstrike Management Ltd., York, United Kingdom.

Antimicrobial resistance is a public health concern. Understanding any role that 
urban seagulls may have as a reservoir of resistant bacteria could be important
for reducing transmission. This study investigated fecal Escherichia coli
isolates from seagulls (herring gulls and lesser black-backed gulls) to determine
the prevalence of extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant (ESC-R) and
fluoroquinolone-resistant E. coli among gull species from two cities (Taunton and
Birmingham) in the United Kingdom (UK). We characterized the genetic background
and carriage of plasmid-mediated resistance genes in extended-spectrum
β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing E. coli obtained from these birds. Sixty ESC-R E.
coli isolates were obtained from 39 seagulls (39/78, 50%), of which 28 (28/60,
46.7%) were positive for plasmid-mediated CTX-M and/or AmpC β-lactamase
resistance genes. Among these, blaCTX-M-15, blaCTX-M-14, and blaCMY-2
predominated. Three isolates belonging to the B2-ST131 clone were detected, of
which two harbored blaCTX-M-15 (typed to C2/H30Rx) and one harbored blaCTX-M-27
and was typed to C1/H30-R (recently described as the C1-M27 sublineage). The
plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance (PMQR) gene carriage prevalence (11.7%)
consisted of aac(6')-Ib-cr and qnrB genes. No carbapenem or colistin resistance
genes were detected. Urban seagulls in the UK are colonized and can spread major 
antimicrobial-resistant E. coli isolates harboring ESBL and PMQR determinants,
including clinically important strains such as the pandemic clone B2-ST131 and
the C1-M27 subclade. This is the first report of ST131-C1-M27 subclade in
wildlife in the UK and in seagulls worldwide.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2019.0351 
PMID: 32519936  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

