
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jun 9;21(11). pii: E4114. doi: 10.3390/ijms21114114.

Dietary Fat and Cancer-Which Is Good, Which Is Bad, and the Body of Evidence.

Bojková B(1), Winklewski PJ(2)(3), Wszedybyl-Winklewska M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology, Institute of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of 
Science, P.J. Šafárik University in Košice, 041 54 Košice, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Human Physiology, Medical University of Gdansk, 80-210 Gdansk,
Poland.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Pomeranian University of Slupsk, 76-200 
Slupsk, Poland.

A high-fat diet (HFD) induces changes in gut microbiota leading to activation of 
pro-inflammatory pathways, and obesity, as a consequence of overnutrition,
exacerbates inflammation, a known risk factor not only for cancer. However,
experimental data showed that the composition of dietary fat has a greater impact
on the pathogenesis of cancer than the total fat content in isocaloric diets.
Similarly, human studies did not prove that a decrease in total fat intake is an 
effective strategy to combat cancer. Saturated fat has long been considered as
harmful, but the current consensus is that moderate intake of saturated fatty
acids (SFAs), including palmitic acid (PA), does not pose a health risk within a 
balanced diet. In regard to monounsaturated fat, plant sources are recommended.
The consumption of plant monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), particularly from
olive oil, has been associated with lower cancer risk. Similarly, the replacement
of animal MUFAs with plant MUFAs decreased cancer mortality. The impact of
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) on cancer risk depends on the ratio between
ω-6 and ω-3 PUFAs. In vivo data showed stimulatory effects of ω-6 PUFAs on tumour
growth while ω-3 PUFAs were protective, but the results of human studies were not
as promising as indicated in preclinical reports. As for trans FAs (TFAs),
experimental data mostly showed opposite effects of industrially produced and
natural TFAs, with the latter being protective against cancer progression, but
human data are mixed, and no clear conclusion can be made. Further studies are
warranted to establish the role of FAs in the control of cell growth in order to 
find an effective strategy for cancer prevention/treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21114114 
PMCID: PMC7312362
PMID: 32526973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

