
1. Research (Wash D C). 2020 Mar 26;2020:9301215. doi: 10.34133/2020/9301215.
eCollection 2020.

Bacterial Template Synthesis of Multifunctional Nanospindles for Glutathione
Detection and Enhanced Cancer-Specific Chemo-Chemodynamic Therapy.

Bao YW(1), Hua XW(1), Zeng J(1), Wu FG(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, School of Biological Science and
Medical Engineering, Southeast University, 2 Sipailou Road, Nanjing 210096,
China.

Biological synthetic methods of nanoparticles have shown great advantages, such
as environmental friendliness, low cost, mild reaction conditions, and enhanced
biocompatibility and stability of products. Bacteria, as one of the most
important living organisms, have been utilized as bioreducing nanofactories to
biosynthesize many metal nanoparticles or compounds. Here, inspired by the
disinfection process of KMnO4, we for the first time introduce bacteria as both
the template and the reducing agent to construct a novel tumor
microenvironment-responsive MnO x -based nanoplatform for biomedical applications
in various aspects. It is found that the bacterium/MnO x -based nanospindles (EM 
NSs) can efficiently encapsulate the chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin (DOX),
leading to the fluorescence quenching of the drug. The as-formed DOX-loaded EM
NSs (EMD NSs) are proven to be decomposed by glutathione (GSH) and can
simultaneously release DOX and Mn2+ ions. The former can be utilized for
sensitive fluorescence-based GSH sensing with a limit of detection as low as
0.28 μM and selective cancer therapy, while the latter plays important roles in
GSH-activated magnetic resonance imaging and chemodynamic therapy. We also
demonstrate that these nanospindles can generate oxygen in the presence of
endogenous hydrogen peroxide to inhibit P-glycoprotein expression under hypoxia
and can achieve excellent tumor eradication and tumor metastasis inhibition
performance. Taken together, this work designs a multifunctional bacterially
synthesized nanomissile for imaging-guided tumor-specific chemo-chemodynamic
combination therapy and will have implications for the design of
microorganism-derived smart nanomedicines.

Copyright © 2020 Yan-Wen Bao et al.

DOI: 10.34133/2020/9301215 
PMCID: PMC7136754
PMID: 32529190 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.

