
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 May 25;11:1041. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01041. eCollection 
2020.

Coupling Between Carbon and Nitrogen Metabolic Processes Mediated by Coastal
Microbes in Synechococcus-Derived Organic Matter Addition Incubations.

Xie R(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2)(3), Chen Q(1)(2), Guo W(1)(4), Jiao N(1)(2), Zheng
Q(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science, College of Ocean and
Earth Sciences, Institute of Marine Microbes and Ecospheres, Xiamen University,
Xiamen, China.
(2)Fujian Key Laboratory of Marine Carbon Sequestration, Xiamen University,
Xiamen, China.
(3)College of Environment and Ecology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Coastal and Wetland Ecosystems, Ministry of Education,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.

Phytoplankton are major contributors to labile organic matter in the upper ocean.
Diverse heterotrophic bacteria successively metabolize these labile compounds and
drive elemental biogeochemical cycling. We investigated the bioavailability of
Synechococcus-derived organic matter (SOM) by estuarine and coastal microbes
during 180-day dark incubations. Variations in organic carbon, inorganic
nutrients, fluorescent dissolved organic matter (FDOM), and total/active
microbial communities were monitored. The entire incubations could be partitioned
into three phases (labeled I, II, and III) based on the total organic carbon
(TOC) consumption rates of 6.38-7.01, 0.53-0.64, and 0.10-0.13 μmol C L-1 day-1, 
respectively. This corresponded with accumulation processes of NH4 +, NO2 -, and 
NO3 -, respectively. One tryptophan-like (C1) and three humic-like (C2, C3, and
C4) FDOM components were identified. The intensity variation of C1 followed
bacterial growth activities, and C2, C3, and C4 displayed labile, semi-labile,
and refractory DOM characteristics, respectively. Alphaproteobacteria,
Gammaproteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Actinobacteria dominated the quickly
consumed process of SOM (phase I) coupled with a substantial amount of NH4 +
generation. Thaumarchaeota became an abundant population with the highest
activities in phase II, especially in the free-living size-fraction, and these
organisms could perform chemoautotroph processes through the ammonia oxidation.
Microbial populations frequently found in the dark ocean, even the deep sea,
became abundant during phase III, in which Nitrospinae/Nitrospirae obtained
energy through nitrite oxidation. Our results shed light on the transformation of
different biological availability of organic carbon by coastal microorganisms
which coupled with the regeneration of different form of inorganic nitrogen.

Copyright © 2020 Xie, Wang, Chen, Guo, Jiao and Zheng.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01041 
PMCID: PMC7261836
PMID: 32523578 

