
1. ACS Sens. 2020 Jul 24;5(7):2118-2127. doi: 10.1021/acssensors.0c00738. Epub 2020 
Jun 26.

A Quantum Dot Nanobiosensor for Rapid Detection of Botulinum Neurotoxin Serotype 
E.

Wang Y(1), Schill KM(1), Fry HC(2), Duncan TV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, Bedford Park, Illinois 60501, United States.
(2)Center for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory, DuPage County,
Illinois 60439, United States.

Botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs) are potent toxins produced by Clostridium bacteria 
that are responsible for the illness botulism and are listed as bioterrorism
agents. BoNT serotype E (BoNT/E) is one of four BoNT serotypes that cause human
botulism and is the second most frequent cause of foodborne botulism. Rapid
detection and discrimination of BoNT serotypes implicated in human disease are
critical for ensuring timely treatment of patients and identifying sources of
toxins, but there have been few reported detection methods for BoNT/E and even
fewer methods usable for BoNT serotyping. We report a nanobiosensor based on
FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer (FRET) between semiconductor nanocrystals
(quantum dots, QDs) and dark quencher-labeled peptide probes to detect
biologically active BoNT/E in aqueous media. The peptide probes contain a
specific cleavage site for active BoNT/E. QD photoluminescence, which changes
intensity due to FRET when the peptide probe is cleaved, was used to indicate
toxin presence and quantity. The detection of a BoNT/E light chain (LcE) and
holotoxin was observed within 3 h. The limits of detection were 0.02 and 2 ng/mL 
for LcE and holotoxin, respectively. The nanobiosensor shows good specificity
toward the target in tests with nontarget BoNT serotypes. The high sensitivity,
simple operation, short detection time, and ability to be used in parallel with
probes developed for other BoNT serotypes indicate that the nanobiosensor will be
useful for rapid BoNT/E detection and serotype discrimination in food analysis.

DOI: 10.1021/acssensors.0c00738 
PMID: 32527082 

