
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020 Oct 15;161:875-890. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.083. Epub 2020 Jun 11.

Role of tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone reductase in phenylalanine hydroxylation
system and pentachlorophenol degradation in Bacillus cereus AOA-CPS1.

Aregbesola OA(1), Kumar A(1), Mokoena MP(1), Olaniran AO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture,
Engineering and Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal (Westville Campus), Private 
Bag X54001, Durban 4000, South Africa.
(2)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture,
Engineering and Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal (Westville Campus), Private 
Bag X54001, Durban 4000, South Africa. Electronic address: olanirana@ukzn.ac.za.

This study reports a ≅12.5 kDa protein tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone reductase
(CpsD) from Bacillus cereus strain AOA-CPS1 (BcAOA). CpsD is purified to
homogeneity with a total yield of 35% and specific activity of 160 U·mg-1 of
protein. CpsD showed optimal activity at pH 7.5 and 40 °C. The enzyme was found
to be functionally stable between pH 7.0-7.5 and temperature between 30 °C and
35 °C. CpsD activity was enhanced by Fe2+ and inhibited by sodium azide and SDS. 
CpsD followed Michaelis-Menten kinetic exhibiting an apparent vmax, Km, kcat and 
kcat/Km values of 0.071 μmol·s-1, 94 μmol, 0.029 s-1 and 3.13 × 10-4 s-1·μmol-1, 
respectively, for substrate tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone. The bioinformatics
analysis indicated that CpsD belongs to the PCD/DCoH superfamily, with specific
conserved protein domains of pterin-4α-carbinolamine  dehydratase (PCD). This
study proposed that CpsD catalysed the reduction of tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone 
to tetrachloro-p-hydroquinone and released the products found in phenylalanine
hydroxylation system (PheOHS) via a Ping-Pong or atypical ternary mechanism; and 
regulate expression of phenylalanine 4-monooxygenase by blocking reverse flux in 
BcAOA PheOHS using a probable Yin-Yang mechanism. The study also concluded that
CpsD may play a catalytic and regulatory role in BcAOA PheOHS and
pentachlorophenol degradation pathway.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.083 
PMID: 32535205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

