
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2020 Jun 20;56(6). pii: E304. doi: 10.3390/medicina56060304.

Cervical-Vaginal Mucin in Fertility Assessment: CA125 as a Predictor of the
Fertile Phase of the Normal Menstrual Cycle.

Trindade AA(1), Usala SJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, 1108 Memorial
Circle, Lubbock, TX 79409, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
1400 S. Coulter Street, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.

: To evaluate the cervical-vaginal mucin, CA125, as a measure of fertility and
possible method for natural family planning (NFP). Cervical-vaginal fluid (CVF)
swab samples have been previously used to measure CA125, 'Qvaginal CA125 levels',
as a function of time of cycle relative to Day 0, the first day of positive urine
LH (luteinizing hormone). Data from 15 women, 20 cycles were used with an
algorithm to establish the Fertile Start Day (FSD) for the cycles. The FSD was
determined as either the second consecutive day of ≥20% Qvaginal CA125 rise or
the first day of ≥400% rise. The interval, (FSD to Day +3), was used as the
theoretical window of fertility, and conception rates assuming abstinence during 
this predicted period of fertility were computed using published day-specific
probabilities of conception (PoC). The mean FSD was Day -4.8 ± 0.5 (SE), 95% CI
(-5.9, -3.7). The estimated pregnancy failure rate (PFR) with abstinence during
[FSD, +3] was 10.7% ± 2.0% (SE), 95% CI (6.9%, 14.8%); with exclusion of one
cycle with very low levels of Qvaginal CA125, the estimated PFR was 9.8% ± 1.9%, 
95% CI (6.3%, 13.8%). Furthermore, the day-specific Qvaginal CA125 values were
normalized to the respective peak Qvaginal CA125 for each cycle, and a mean
normalized day-specific Qvaginal CA125 plot was generated. The first derivative
of the mean normalized day-specific Qvaginal CA125 plot showed a significant
increase between Day -4.5 and Day -3.5, which correlated with the mean FSD. A
Qvaginal CA125-based method holds promise as a means to identify the start of the
fertile window and may prove useful in NFP, especially when combined with
available home hormonal fertility awareness kits.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina56060304 
PMCID: PMC7353875
PMID: 32575768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

