
1. Environ Int. 2020 Sep;142:105867. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2020.105867. Epub 2020
Jun 22.

Plant litter enhances degradation of the herbicide MCPA and increases formation
of biogenic non-extractable residues in soil.

Nowak KM(1), Miltner A(2), Poll C(3), Kandeler E(3), Streck T(4), Pagel H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universität Berlin, Institute of Biotechnology, Chair of
Geobiotechnology, Ackerstraße 76, 13355 Berlin, Germany; Helmholtz-Centre for
Environmental Research - UFZ, Department of Environmental Biotechnology,
Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany. Electronic address:
karolina.nowak@tu-berlin.de.
(2)Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Department of Environmental
Biotechnology, Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany.
(3)University of Hohenheim, Institute of Soil Science and Land Evaluation,
Department of Soil Biology, Emil-Wolff-Str. 27, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany.
(4)University of Hohenheim, Institute of Soil Science and Land Evaluation,
Department of Biogeophysics, Emil-Wolff-Str. 27, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany.

Amendment of soils with plant residues is common practice for improving soil
quality. In addition to stimulated microbial activity, the supply of fresh
soluble organic (C) from litter may accelerate the microbial degradation of
chemicals in soils. Therefore, the aim of this study was to test whether the
maize litter enhances degradation of 4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid (MCPA)
and increases formation of non-toxic biogenic non-extractable residues (bioNERs).
Soil was amended with 13C6-MCPA and incubated with or without litter addition on 
the top. Three soil layers were sampled with increasing distance from the top:
0-2 mm, 2-5 mm and 5-20 mm; and the mass balance of 13C6-MCPA transformation
determined. Maize litter promoted microbial activity, mineralization of 13C6-MCPA
and bioNER formation in the upper two layers (0-2 and 2-5 mm). The mineralization
of 13C6-MCPA in soil with litter increased to 27% compared to only 6% in the
control. Accordingly, maize addition reduced the amount of extractable residual
MCPA in soil from 77% (control) to 35% of initially applied 13C6-MCPA. While
non-extractable residues (NERs) were <6% in control soil, litter addition raised 
NERs to 21%. Thereby, bioNERs comprised 14% of 13C6-MCPA equivalents. We found
characteristic differences of bioNER formation with distance to litter. While
total NERs in soil at a distance of 2-5 mm were mostly identified as 13C-bioNERs 
(97%), only 45-46% of total NERs were assigned to bioNERs in the 0-2 and 5-20 mm 
layers. Phospholipid fatty acid analysis indicated that fungi and Gram-negative
bacteria were mainly involved in MCPA degradation. Maize-C particularly
stimulated fungal activity in the adjacent soil, which presumably facilitated
non-biogenic NER formation. The plant litter accelerated formation of both
non-toxic bioNERs and non-biogenic NERs. More studies on the structural
composition of non-biogenic NERs with toxicity potential are needed for future
recommendations on litter addition in agriculture.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2020.105867 
PMID: 32585504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

