
1. FEBS J. 2021 Feb;288(4):1366-1386. doi: 10.1111/febs.15462. Epub 2020 Jul 27.

A study on the structure, mechanism, and biochemistry of kanamycin B dioxygenase 
(KanJ)-an enzyme with a broad range of substrates.

Mrugała B(1), Miłaczewska A(1), Porebski PJ(1)(2), Niedzialkowska E(1)(2), Guzik 
M(1), Minor W(2), Borowski T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jerzy Haber Institute of Catalysis and Surface Chemistry, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Kanamycin A is an aminoglycoside antibiotic isolated from Streptomyces
kanamyceticus and used against a wide spectrum of bacteria, including
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Biosynthesis of kanamycin involves an oxidative
deamination step catalyzed by kanamycin B dioxygenase (KanJ), thereby the C2'
position of kanamycin B is transformed into a keto group upon release of ammonia.
Here, we present for the first time, structural models of KanJ with several
ligands, which along with the results of ITC binding assays and HPLC activity
tests explain substrate specificity of the enzyme. The large size of the binding 
pocket suggests that KanJ can accept a broad range of substrates, which was
confirmed by activity tests. Specificity of the enzyme with respect to its
substrate is determined by the hydrogen bond interactions between the methylamino
group of the antibiotic and highly conserved Asp134 and Cys150 as well as between
hydroxyl groups of the substrate and Asn120 and Gln80. Upon antibiotic binding,
the C terminus loop is significantly rearranged and Gln80 and Asn120, which are
directly involved in substrate recognition, change their conformations. Based on 
reaction energy profiles obtained by density functional theory (DFT) simulations,
we propose a mechanism of ketone formation involving the reactive FeIV  = O and
proceeding either via OH rebound, which yields a hemiaminal intermediate or by
abstraction of two hydrogen atoms, which leads to an imine species. At acidic pH,
the latter involves a lower barrier than the OH rebound, whereas at basic pH, the
barrier leading to an imine vanishes completely. DATABASES: Structural data are
available in PDB database under the accession numbers: 6S0R, 6S0T, 6S0U, 6S0W,
6S0V, 6S0S. Diffraction images are available at the Integrated Resource for
Reproducibility in Macromolecular Crystallography at
http://proteindiffraction.org under DOIs: 10.18430/m36s0t, 10.18430/m36s0u,
10.18430/m36s0r, 10.18430/m36s0s, 10.18430/m36s0v, 10.18430/m36s0w. A data set
collection of computational results is available in the Mendeley Data database
under DOI: 10.17632/sbyzssjmp3.1 and in the ioChem-BD database under DOI:
10.19061/iochem-bd-4-18.

© 2020 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15462 
PMCID: PMC8034593 [Available on 2022-02-01]
PMID: 32592631 

