
1. J Immunol. 1988 Sep 15;141(6):1835-9.

Species-specific structural differences in the alpha 1 + alpha 2 domains
determine the frequency of murine cytotoxic T cell precursors stimulated by human
and murine class I molecules.

Engelhard VH(1), Le AX, Holterman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville 22908.

The frequency of murine CTL precursors (CTLp) that recognize the human
histocompatibility Ag HLA-A2 and HLA-B7 was measured and found to be
approximately two orders of magnitude lower than the frequency of CTLp that
recognize murine H-2 alloantigens. The possible contribution of other cell
surface molecules to this difference in response was addressed by expression of
the H-2Ld molecule on a human cell and the HLA-B7 molecule on a murine cell. It
was found that both human and murine H-2Ld expressing cells elicited comparable
levels of H-2Ld specific CTL. Although murine HLA-B7 positive cells stimulated a 
higher frequency of HLA-B7-specific CTLp than did human cells, this appeared to
be largely due to stimulation of CTLp that recognized HLA-B7 in the context of
H-2 molecules; consequently, it was concluded that the difference in the
frequency of murine CTLp elicited by human and murine class I Ag is due to
species specific structural differences in these molecules. The regions of the
class I molecule that were responsible for this difference were mapped using
chimeric class I molecules constructed to replace domains of the human molecule
with their murine counterparts. It was found that the frequency of CTLp is
controlled by structures within the alpha 1 and alpha 2 domains of the molecule. 
These results are discussed in the light of models for T cell recognition of
class I Ag and the diversification of the T cell receptor repertoire.


PMID: 3262639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

