
1. Nutrients. 2020 Jun 30;12(7). pii: E1946. doi: 10.3390/nu12071946.

Chenopodium Quinoa and Salvia Hispanica Provide Immunonutritional Agonists to
Ameliorate Hepatocarcinoma Severity under a High-Fat Diet.

Laparra Llopis JM(1), Brown D(1), Saiz B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Madrid Institute for Advanced studies in Food (IMDEA Food). Ctra. Cantoblanco 
8, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Complex interactions between immunonutritional agonist and high fat intake (HFD),
the immune system and finally gut microbiota are important determinants of
hepatocarcinoma (HCC) severity. The ability of immunonutritional agonists to
modulate major aspects such as liver innate immunity and inflammation and
alterations in major lipids profile as well as gut microbiota during HCC
development is poorly understood. 1H NMR has been employed to assess imbalances
in saturated fatty acids, MUFA and PUFA, which were associated to variations in
iron homeostasis. These effects were dependent on the botanical nature
(Chenopodium quinoa vs. Salvia hispanica L.) of the compounds. The results showed
that immunonutritional agonists' promoted resistance to hepatocarcinogenesis
under pro-tumorigenic inflammation reflected, at a different extent, in increased
proportions of F4/80+ cells in injured livers as well as positive trends of
accumulated immune mediators (CD68/CD206 ratio) in intestinal tissue.
Administration of all immunonutritional agonists caused similar variations of
fecal microbiota, towards a lower obesity-inducing potential than animals only
fed a HFD. Modulation of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes contents restored the
induction of microbial metabolites to improve epithelial barrier function,
showing an association with liver saturated fatty acids and the MUFA and PUFA
fractions. Collectively, these data provide novel findings supporting beneficial 
immunometabolic effects targeting hepatocarcinogenesis, influencing innate
immunity within the gut-liver axis, and providing novel insights into their
immunomodulatory activity.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12071946 
PMCID: PMC7400258
PMID: 32629893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

