
1. J Nat Prod. 2020 Jul 24;83(7):2145-2154. doi: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.0c00171. Epub 
2020 Jul 6.

Synthesis and Antimicrobial Activity of Burkholderia-Related
4-Hydroxy-3-methyl-2-alkenylquinolines (HMAQs) and Their N-Oxide Counterparts.

Piochon M(1), Coulon PML(1), Caulet A(1), Groleau MC(1), Déziel E(1), Gauthier
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Armand-Frappier Santé Biotechnologie, Institut National de la Recherche
Scientifique (INRS), 531, Boulevard des Prairies, Laval (Québec), Canada, H7V
1B7.

The Burkholderia genus offers a promising potential in medicine because of the
diversity of biologically active natural products encoded in its genome. Some
pathogenic Burkholderia spp. biosynthesize a specific class of antimicrobial
2-alkyl-4(1H)-quinolones, i.e., 4-hydroxy-3-methyl-2-alkenylquinolines (HMAQs)
and their N-oxide derivatives (HMAQNOs). Herein, we report the synthesis of a
series of six HMAQs and HMAQNOs featuring a trans-Δ2 double bond at the C2-alkyl 
chain. The quinolone scaffold was obtained via the Conrad-Limpach approach, while
the (E)-2-alkenyl chain was inserted through Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling under 
microwave radiation without noticeable isomerization according to the optimized
conditions. Subsequent oxidation of enolate-protected HMAQs cleanly led to the
formation of HMAQNOs following cleavage of the ethyl carbonate group. Synthetic
HMAQs and HMAQNOs were evaluated in vitro for their antimicrobial activity
against different Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria as well as against
molds and yeasts. The biological results support and extend the potential of
HMAQs and HMAQNOs as antimicrobials, especially against Gram-positive bacteria.
We also confirm the involvement of HMAQs in the autoregulation of the Hmq system 
in Burkholderia ambifaria.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.0c00171 
PMID: 32631063 

