
1. Environ Microbiol. 2020 Sep;22(9):3823-3837. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15158. Epub
2020 Aug 2.

Light supports cell-integrity and growth rates of taxonomically diverse coastal
photoheterotrophs.

Arandia-Gorostidi N(1)(2), González JM(3), Huete-Stauffer TM(1)(4), Ansari MI(4),
Morán XAG(4), Alonso-Sáez L(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Español de Oceanografía, Centro Oceanográfico de Gijón/Xixón,
Gijón/Xixón, Asturias, Spain.
(2)Department of Earth System Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of La Laguna, La Laguna, Spain.
(4)Red Sea Research Center, Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering
Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal,
Saudi Arabia.
(5)AZTI, Marine Research, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA),
Txatxarramendi ugartea z/g, Sukarrieta, Bizkaia, 48395, Spain.

Despite the widespread distribution of proteorhodopsin (PR)-containing bacteria
in the oceans, the use of light-derived energy to promote bacterial growth has
only been shown in a few bacterial isolates, and there is a paucity of data
describing the metabolic effects of light on environmental photoheterotrophic
taxa. Here, we assessed the effects of light on the taxonomic composition, cell
integrity and growth responses of microbial communities in monthly incubations
between spring and autumn under different environmental conditions. The
photoheterotrophs expressing PR in situ were dominated by Pelagibacterales and
SAR116 in July and November, while members of Euryarchaeota, Gammaproteobacteria 
and Bacteroidetes dominated the PR expression in spring. Cell-membrane integrity 
decreased under dark conditions throughout most of the assessment, with maximal
effects in summer, under low-nutrient conditions. A positive effect of light on
growth was observed in one incubation (out of nine), coinciding with a declining 
phytoplankton bloom. Light-enhanced growth was found in Gammaproteobacteria
(Alteromonadales) and Bacteroidetes (Polaribacter and Tenacibaculum).
Unexpectedly, some Pelagibacterales also exhibited higher growth rates under
light conditions. We propose that the energy harvested by PRs helps to maintain
cell viability in dominant coastal photoheterotrophic oligotrophs while promoting
the growth of some widespread taxa benefiting from the decline of phytoplankton
blooms.

© 2020 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15158 
PMID: 32643243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

