
1. J Clin Lab Immunol. 1988 Jun;26(2):73-9.

Complement fixation by solid phase immune complexes. Reduced capacity in SLE
sera.

Baatrup G(1), Jonsson H, Sj√∂holm A, Sturfelt G, Svehag SE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University of Odense, Denmark.

We describe an ELISA for assessment of complement function based on the capacity 
of serum to support fixation of complement components to solid phase immune
complexes (IC). Microplates were coated with aggregated bovine serum albumin
(BSA) followed by rabbit anti-BSA IgG. The solid phase IC were reacted with human
serum. The uptake of C3b, C4b and properdin was measured using biotinylated
F(ab)2 antibodies to each of the proteins, avidin alkaline phosphatase, and
paranitrophenyl phosphate. Serial samples obtained from 15 patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus were investigated. Out of 72 sera, 24 showed a reduced
capacity to support incorporation of C4b into solid phase IC. Thirty-one of the
sera showed low C3b binding and 59 of the sera a reduced uptake of properdin. The
incorporation into solid phase IC of C3b and C4b as well as of C3b and properdin 
were closely correlated at high disease activity. In general, patients with
severe disease manifestations showed low values in the uptake assays. Judging
from the results obtained by analysis of serial samples, the uptake of C3b, C4b
and properdin, complement mediated solubilization of fluid phase IC and the
concentrations of C1q binding IC were useful indicators of disease activity in
the patients. The concentrations of circulating C4, C3 and properdin varied less 
consistently according to disease activity. The concentrations of serum properdin
were never found to be low, which was in contrast to the finding of reduced
properdin uptake by solid phase IC in most of the samples.


PMID: 3264027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

