
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jul 9;10(1):11305. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-68419-y.

Enzymatic reaction mechanism of cis-aconitate decarboxylase based on the crystal 
structure of IRG1 from Bacillus subtilis.

Chun HL(1), Lee SY(1), Lee SH(1), Lee CS(2), Park HH(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, 06974, Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Science,
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, 52828, Republic of Korea.
(3)College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, 06974, Republic of Korea.
xrayleox@cau.ac.kr.

Itaconate, which is formed by decarboxylation of cis-aconitate-an intermediate
metabolite in the tricarboxylic acid cycle-has been used as a building block in
polymer synthesis and is an important chemical in several biomedical and
industrial applications. Itaconate is an immunometabolite with antibacterial,
antiviral, immunoregulatory, and tumor-promoting activities. Recent focus has
been on the role of itaconate in the field of immunology, with immune-responsive 
gene 1 (IRG1) being identified as the cis-aconitate decarboxylase responsible for
itaconate production. We solved the structure of IRG1 from Bacillus subtilis
(bsIRG1) and showed that IRG1 adopts either a closed or an open conformation;
bsIRG1 was in the open form. A1 and A2 loops around the active site are flexible 
and can control the formation of the open and closed forms of IRG1. An in silico 
docking simulation showed that only the open form of IRG1 can accommodate the
substrate. The most energetically favorable position of cis-aconitate in the
active site of bsIRG1 involved the localization of C2 and C5 of cis-aconitate
into the H102 region and H151 region of bsIRG1, respectively. Based on the
structural study of bsIRG1, compared with IDS epimerase, and in silico docking
simulation, we proposed two tentative enzymatic reaction mechanisms of IRG1, a
two-base model and a one-base model.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-68419-y 
PMCID: PMC7347537
PMID: 32647315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

