
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Jul 8;8(7). pii: E1016. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8071016.

The Salmonella enterica Plasmidome as a Reservoir of Antibiotic Resistance.

Emond-Rheault JG(1), Hamel J(1), Jeukens J(1), Freschi L(1), Kukavica-Ibrulj
I(1), Boyle B(1), Tamber S(2), Malo D(3)(4), Franz E(5), Burnett E(6), Daigle
F(7)(8), Arya G(9), Sanderson K(10), Wiedmann M(11), Slawson RM(12), Weadge
JT(12), Stephan R(13), Bekal S(14), Gruenheid S(15), Goodridge LD(16), Levesque
RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes (IBIS), Université Laval,
Québec, QC G1V 0A6, Canada.
(2)Health Canada, Bureau of Microbial Hazards, Ottawa, ON K1A 0K9, Canada.
(3)McGill Research Center on Complex Traits, McGill University, Montréal, QC H3G 
0B1, Canada.
(4)Departments of Medicine and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC
H3G 0B1, Canada.
(5)Centre for Infectious Disease Control (CIb), National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment (RIVM), 3720 BA Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
(6)Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, Montréal, QC H9X 3L9, Canada.
(7)Département de Microbiologie, Infectiologie et Immunologie, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada.
(8)Swine and poultry Infectious Diseases Research Center (CRIPA-FRQNT), Montréal,
QC H3C 3J7, Canada.
(9)National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada, Guelph, ON
N1G 3W4, Canada.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N
1N4, Canada.
(11)Department of Food Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-7201, USA.
(12)Department of Biology, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, ON N2L 3C5,
Canada.
(13)Institute for Food Safety and hygiene, University of Zürich, CH-8057 Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(14)Laboratoire de santé publique du Québec, Sainte-Anne-de-Bellevue, QC H9X 3R5,
Canada.
(15)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, McGill University, Montréal, QC H3G 
0B1, Canada.
(16)Food Science Department, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.

The emergence of multidrug-resistant bacterial strains worldwide has become a
serious problem for public health over recent decades. The increase in
antimicrobial resistance has been expanding via plasmids as mobile genetic
elements encoding antimicrobial resistance (AMR) genes that are transferred
vertically and horizontally. This study focuses on Salmonella enterica, one of
the leading foodborne pathogens in industrialized countries. S. enterica is known
to carry several plasmids involved not only in virulence but also in AMR. In the 
current paper, we present an integrated strategy to detect plasmid scaffolds in
whole genome sequencing (WGS) assemblies. We developed a two-step procedure to
predict plasmids based on i) the presence of essential elements for plasmid
replication and mobility, as well as ii) sequence similarity to a reference
plasmid. Next, to confirm the accuracy of the prediction in 1750 S. enterica
short-read sequencing data, we combined Oxford Nanopore MinION long-read
sequencing with Illumina MiSeq short-read sequencing in hybrid assemblies for 84 
isolates to evaluate the proportion of plasmid that has been detected. At least
one scaffold with an origin of replication (ORI) was predicted in 61.3% of the
Salmonella isolates tested. The results indicated that IncFII and IncI1 ORIs were
distributed in many S. enterica serotypes and were the most prevalent AMR genes
carrier, whereas IncHI2A/IncHI2 and IncA/C2 were more serotype restricted but
bore several AMR genes. Comparison between hybrid and short-read assemblies
revealed that 81.1% of plasmids were found in the short-read sequencing using our
pipeline. Through this process, we established that plasmids are prevalent in S. 
enterica and we also substantially expand the AMR genes in the resistome of this 
species.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8071016 
PMCID: PMC7409225
PMID: 32650601 

