
1. Curr Microbiol. 2020 Oct;77(10):2904-2914. doi: 10.1007/s00284-020-02110-3. Epub 
2020 Jul 10.

Evaluation of the Toxicity of Supernatant Cultures and Spore-Crystal Mixtures of 
Bacillus thuringiensis Strains Isolated from Algeria.

Djenane Z(1)(2)(3), Lázaro-Berenguer M(2), Nateche F(1), Ferré J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Group, Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Faculty of
Biological Sciences, USTHB, El Alia, BP 32, 16111, Bab Ezzouar, Algiers, Algeria.
(2)ERI de Biotecnología y Biomedicina (BIOTECMED), Department of Genetics,
Universitat de València, 46100, Burjassot, Spain.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University Yahia Farès, 26000,
Médéa, Algeria.
(4)ERI de Biotecnología y Biomedicina (BIOTECMED), Department of Genetics,
Universitat de València, 46100, Burjassot, Spain. juan.ferre@uv.es.

Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is the most used technology for biological control of
insect pathogens worldwide. In order to select new Bt candidates challenging the 
emergence of insect's resistance, a mass bioassay and molecular screening was
performed on an autochthonous collection. Toxicity assays against neonate larvae 
of three lepidopteran species (Mamestra brassicae, Grapholita molesta, and
Spodoptera exigua) were conducted using spore-crystal mixtures and supernatant
cultures of 49 Bt isolates harboring at least one gene coding for a
lepidopteran-specific insecticidal protein. A threshold of 30% of "functional
mortality" was used to discriminate between "nontoxic" and "toxic" isolates. The 
toxicity of many Bt isolates competed with that of Btk-HD1. However, only three
of them (Bl4NA, Bl5NA, and Bl9NA) showed high toxicity in both spore-crystal
mixtures and supernatant cultures against the three lepidopteran species. The Bt 
isolates Bl4NA and Bl9NA express a protein of 130 kDa whereas the Bt isolate
Bl5NA expresses a protein of 65-70 kDa. The LC-MS/MS results indicate that the
major peptides in the 130 kDa band of Bl9NA were Cry1Da, Cry1Ca, Cry1Ab, and
Cry1Aa, and those in the 70 kDa band of Bl5NA were Cry1Aa and Cry1Ca. The
evaluation of the protein content of the supernatants by comparison to Btk-HD1
indicates the overproduction of Vip3 proteins in these strains (most likely
Vip3Aa in Bl4NA and Bl9NA and Vip3Ca in Bl5NA). In addition, these three Bt
strains do not produce β-exotoxins. Based on our results, the three selected
strains could be considered promising candidates to be used in insect pest
control.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-020-02110-3 
PMID: 32651607 

