
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jul 15;10(1):11635. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-68443-y.

Tuberculosis causes highly conserved metabolic changes in human patients,
mycobacteria-infected mice and zebrafish larvae.

Ding Y(1), Raterink RJ(2), Mar√≠n-Juez R(1)(3), Veneman WJ(1), Egbers K(2), van
den Eeden S(4), Haks MC(4), Joosten SA(4), Ottenhoff THM(4), Harms AC(2), Alia
A(5)(6), Hankemeier T(2), Spaink HP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Sylviusweg 72, 2333 BE, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(2)Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, Leiden University, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung 
Research, 61231, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
(5)Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, 2333, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(6)Institute for Medical Physics and Biophysics, University of Leipzig, 04107,
Leipzig, Germany.
(7)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Sylviusweg 72, 2333 BE, Leiden, The
Netherlands. H.P.Spaink@biology.leidenuniv.nl.

Tuberculosis is a highly infectious and potentially fatal disease accompanied by 
wasting symptoms, which cause severe metabolic changes in infected people. In
this study we have compared the effect of mycobacteria infection on the level of 
metabolites in blood of humans and mice and whole zebrafish larvae using one
highly standardized mass spectrometry pipeline, ensuring technical comparability 
of the results. Quantification of a range of circulating small amines showed that
the levels of the majority of these compounds were significantly decreased in all
three groups of infected organisms. Ten of these metabolites were common between 
the three different organisms comprising: methionine, asparagine, cysteine,
threonine, serine, tryptophan, leucine, citrulline, ethanolamine and
phenylalanine. The metabolomic changes of zebrafish larvae after infection were
confirmed by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Our study identified common
biomarkers for tuberculosis disease in humans, mice and zebrafish, showing across
species conservation of metabolic reprogramming processes as a result of disease.
Apparently, the mechanisms underlying these processes are independent of
environmental, developmental and vertebrate evolutionary factors. The zebrafish
larval model is highly suited to further investigate the mechanism of metabolic
reprogramming and the connection with wasting syndrome due to infection by
mycobacteria.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-68443-y 
PMCID: PMC7363909
PMID: 32669636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

