
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jul 12;21(14). pii: E4912. doi: 10.3390/ijms21144912.

Thrombospondin-1 Plays an Essential Role in Yes-Associated Protein Nuclear
Translocation during the Early Phase of Trypanosoma cruzi Infection in Heart
Endothelial Cells.

Arun A(1), Rayford KJ(1), Cooley A(1), Rachakonda G(1), Villalta F(1), Pratap
S(2), Lima MF(2)(3), Sheibani N(4), Nde PN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Physiology, Meharry Medical
College, Nashville, TN 37208, USA.
(2)School of Graduate Studies and Research, Meharry Medical College, Nashville,
TN 37208, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, 
The City College of New York, New York, NY 10031, USA.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Biomedical Engineering and
Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

The protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi is the causative agent of Chagas
disease. This neglected tropical disease causes severe morbidity and mortality in
endemic regions. About 30% of T. cruzi infected individuals will present with
cardiac complications. Invasive trypomastigotes released from infected cells can 
be carried in the vascular endothelial system to infect neighboring and distant
cells. During the process of cellular infection, the parasite induces host cells,
to increase the levels of host thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), to facilitate the
process of infection. TSP-1 plays important roles in the functioning of vascular 
cells, including vascular endothelial cells with important implications in
cardiovascular health. Many signal transduction pathways, including the
yes-associated protein 1 (YAP)/transcriptional coactivator, with PDZ-binding
motif (TAZ) signaling, which are upstream of TSP-1, have been linked to the
pathophysiology of heart damage. The molecular mechanisms by which T. cruzi
signals, and eventually infects, heart endothelial cells remain unknown. To
evaluate the importance of TSP-1 expression in heart endothelial cells during the
process of T. cruzi infection, we exposed heart endothelial cells prepared from
Wild Type and TSP-1 Knockout mouse to invasive T. cruzi trypomastigotes at
multiple time points, and evaluated changes in the hippo signaling cascade using 
immunoblotting and immunofluorescence assays. We found that the parasite turned
off the hippo signaling pathway in TSP-1KO heart endothelial cells. The levels of
SAV1 and MOB1A increased to a maximum of 2.70 ± 0.23 and 5.74 ± 1.45-fold at 3
and 6 h, respectively, in TSP-1KO mouse heart endothelial cells (MHEC), compared 
to WT MHEC, following a parasite challenge. This was accompanied by a significant
continuous increase in the nuclear translocation of downstream effector molecule 
YAP, to a maximum mean nuclear fluorescence intensity of 10.14 ± 0.40 at 6 h,
compared to wild type cells. Furthermore, we found that increased nuclear
translocated YAP significantly colocalized with the transcription co-activator
molecule pan-TEAD, with a maximum Pearson's correlation coefficient of 0.51 ±
0.06 at 6 h, compared to YAP-Pan-TEAD colocalization in the WT MHEC, which
decreased significantly, with a minimum Pearson's correlation coefficient of 0.30
± 0.01 at 6 h. Our data indicate that, during the early phase of infection,
upregulated TSP-1 is essential for the regulation of the hippo signaling pathway.
These studies advance our understanding of the molecular interactions occurring
between heart endothelial cells and T. cruzi, in the presence and absence of
TSP-1, providing insights into processes linked to parasite dissemination and
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21144912 
PMCID: PMC7403984
PMID: 32664627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

