
1. Proteomics. 2020 Jul 14:e2000036. doi: 10.1002/pmic.202000036. [Epub ahead of
print]

Insights into the Hematopoietic Regulatory Activities of Osteoblast by
Secretomics.

Hovey O(1)(2), Pasha R(1)(2), Lehmann Z(1)(2), Pineault N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Blood Services, Centre for Innovation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology Department, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Canada.

Osteoblasts are a key component of the endosteal hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
niche and are recognized with strong hematopoietic supporting activity.
Similarly, mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC)-derived osteoblast (M-OST) conditioned
media (OCM) enhances the growth of hematopoietic progenitors in culture and
modulate their engraftment activity. We aimed to characterize the hematopoietic
supporting activity of OCM by comparing the secretome of M-OST to that of their
precursor. Over 300 proteins were quantified by mass spectroscopy in media
conditioned with MSC or M-OST, with 47 being differentially expressed. Included
were growth factors, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and proteins from the
complement pathways. The functional contribution of selected proteins on the
growth and differentiation of cord blood (CB) progenitors was tested. Secreted
Protein Acidic and Rich in Cysteine (SPARC) and Galectin 3 (Gal3) had little
impact on the growth of CB cells in serum-free medium (SFM). In contrast,
inhibition of the complement 3 A receptor (C3a-R) present on CB progenitors
significantly reduced the growth of CD34+ cells in OCM cultures but not in SFM.
These results provide new insights into changes in factors released by MSC
undergoing osteoblast differentiation, and on paracrine factors that are
partially responsible for the hematopoietic supporting activity of osteoblasts.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.202000036 
PMID: 32666692 

