
1. Molecules. 2020 Jul 13;25(14). pii: E3183. doi: 10.3390/molecules25143183.

New Copper(I) Complex with a Coumarin as Ligand with Antibacterial Activity
against Flavobacterium psychrophilum.

Aldabaldetrecu M(1), Parra M(2)(3), Soto S(4), Arce P(1), Tello M(3), Guerrero
J(1), Modak B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Coordination Compounds and Supramolecularity, Faculty of
Chemistry and Biology, University of Santiago of Chile, 9170002 Santiago, Chile.
(2)Laboratory of Natural Products Chemistry, Centre of Aquatic Biotechnology,
Faculty of Chemistry and Biology, University of Santiago of Chile, 9170002
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Laboratory of Bacterial Metagenomic, Centre of Aquatic Biotechnology, Faculty 
of Chemistry and Biology, University of Santiago of Chile, 9170002 Santiago,
Chile.
(4)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Oral Biology, Faculty of Odontology, University
of Chile, 8380000 Santiago, Chile.

A new copper (I) complex, [Cu(NN1)2](ClO4), was synthesized, where NN1 was a
imine ligand 6-((quinolin-2-ylmethylene)amino)-2H-chromen-2-one obtained by a
derivatization of natural compound coumarin. The structural characterization in
solution was done by NMR techniques, UV-Vis and cyclic voltammetry. The potential
antibacterial effect of [Cu(NN1)2](ClO4), was assessed for F. psychrophilum
isolated 10094. F. psychrophilum is a Gram-negative bacterium which causes
diseases such as bacterial cold-water disease and rainbow trout fry syndrome,
causing large economic losses in the freshwater salmonid aquaculture industry.
This complex show to have antibacterial activity against F. psychrophilum 10094
at non-cytotoxic concentration in cell line derived from trout (F. psychrophilum 
10094 IC50 16.0 ± 0.9; RT-GUT IC50 53.0 ± 3.1 µg/mL).

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25143183 
PMCID: PMC7397040
PMID: 32668579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

