
1. J Biol Inorg Chem. 2020 Aug;25(5):797-809. doi: 10.1007/s00775-020-01802-2. Epub 
2020 Jul 13.

Zn(II) and Cd(II) thiosemicarbazones for stimulation/inhibition of kojic acid
biosynthesis from Aspergillus flavus and the fungal defense behavior against the 
metal complexes' excesses.

Mahmoud GA(1), Ibrahim ABM(2), Mayer P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Assiut University, 
Assiut, 71516, Egypt. ghadamoukabel@aun.edu.eg.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Assiut University, Assiut, 71516,
Egypt.
(3)Department Chemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Butenandtstr. 5-13,
Haus, 81377, Munich, Germany.

The complexes {[ZnL1Cl] C1, [ZnL2Cl].0.5H2O C2, [CdL1Cl] C3, and [CdL2Cl] C4}
were prepared from tridentate thiosemicarbazones
{HL1 = 4-(3-nitrophenyl)-1-((pyridin-2-yl)methylene) thiosemicarbazide and
HL2 = 4-(2,4-dimethoxyphenyl)-1-((pyridin-2-yl)methylene)thiosemicarbazide} and
identified by elemental CHNS, spectroscopic {IR and UV-Vis.}, thermal and DMF
solution electrical conductivity data. On another hand, kojic acid (KA) which
represents important secondary metabolite with numerous hot spot applications was
successfully biosynthesized from Aspergillus flavus and structurally analyzed by 
single crystal analysis. The Zn(II) complexes C1&C2 (0.3 mM) enhanced the KA
biosynthesis by 70.87% and 42.26%, while 76.09% of C1 and 72.78% of C2 were
absorbed by the fungal cells. The Cd(II) complexes C3&C4 at 0.3 mM inhibited KA
production by 87.95% and 97.03% with Cd(II) consumption reaching to 40.09% &
37.3%, while 0.4 mM of C3&C4 resulted in 100% inhibition of kojic acid
biosynthesis. Light microscopic analysis showed the fungal structural
abnormalities and the cell antioxidant behavior was detected. These complexes
could be highly applicable as new stimulators and inhibitors of kojic acid
production.

DOI: 10.1007/s00775-020-01802-2 
PMID: 32661783 

