
1. medRxiv. 2020 Jul 6. pii: 2020.07.04.20142752. doi: 10.1101/2020.07.04.20142752.

Mapping Systemic Inflammation and Antibody Responses in Multisystem Inflammatory 
Syndrome in Children (MIS-C).

Gruber C(1)(2)(3)(4), Patel R(1)(2)(3)(4), Trachman R(2)(3), Lepow L(5), Amanat
F(4), Krammer F(4), Wilson KM(2)(3), Onel K(3)(5), Geanon D(1), Tuballes K(1),
Patel M(1), Mouskas K(5), Simons N(5), Barcessat V(1), Valle DD(1), Udondem S(5),
Kang G(5), Gangadharan S(3), Ofori-Amanfo G(3), Rahman A(1), Kim-Schulze S(1),
Charney A(5), Gnjatic S(1), Gelb BD(2)(3), Merad M(1), Bogunovic D(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, NY,
NY, USA.
(2)Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, NY, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, NY, NY,
USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, NY, NY,
USA.
(5)Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, NY,
NY, USA.

Update in
    Cell. 2020 Sep 14;:.

Initially, the global outbreak of COVID-19 caused by severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spared children from severe disease. However,
after the initial wave of infections, clusters of a novel hyperinflammatory
disease have been reported in regions with ongoing SARS-CoV-2 epidemics. While
the characteristic clinical features are becoming clear, the pathophysiology
remains unknown. Herein, we report on the immune profiles of eight Multisystem
Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) cases. We document that all MIS-C
patients had evidence of prior SARS-CoV-2 exposure, mounting an antibody response
with normal isotype-switching and neutralization capability. We further profiled 
the secreted immune response by high-dimensional cytokine assays, which
identified elevated signatures of inflammation (IL-18 and IL-6), lymphocytic and 
myeloid chemotaxis and activation (CCL3, CCL4, and CDCP1) and mucosal immune
dysregulation (IL-17A, CCL20, CCL28). Mass cytometry immunophenotyping of
peripheral blood revealed reductions of mDC1 and non-classical monocytes, as well
as both NK- and T- lymphocytes, suggesting extravasation to affected tissues.
Markers of activated myeloid function were also evident, including upregulation
of ICAM1 and FcR1 in neutrophil and non-classical monocytes, well-documented
markers in autoinflammation and autoimmunity that indicate enhanced antigen
presentation and Fc-mediated responses. Finally, to assess the role for
autoimmunity secondary to infection, we profiled the auto-antigen reactivity of
MIS-C plasma, which revealed both known disease-associated autoantibodies
(anti-La) and novel candidates that recognize endothelial, gastrointestinal and
immune-cell antigens. All patients were treated with anti- IL6R antibody or IVIG,
which led to rapid disease resolution tracking with normalization of inflammatory
markers.

DOI: 10.1101/2020.07.04.20142752 
PMCID: PMC7359537
PMID: 32676612 

