
1. Biochemistry. 2020 Aug 18;59(32):2962-2973. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00515.
Epub 2020 Jul 28.

Biochemical and Structural Characterization of l-2-Keto-3-deoxyarabinonate
Dehydratase: A Unique Catalytic Mechanism in the Class I Aldolase Protein
Superfamily.

Watanabe S(1)(2)(3), Watanabe Y(1)(2), Nobuchi R(2), Ono A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Graduate School of Agriculture, Ehime University,
3-5-7 Tarumi, Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8566, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Agriculture, Ehime University, 3-5-7 Tarumi, Matsuyama, Ehime
790-8566, Japan.
(3)Center for Marine Environmental Studies (CMES), Ehime University, 2-5
Bunkyo-cho, Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8577, Japan.

l-2-Keto-3-deoxyarabinonate (l-KDA) dehydratase (AraD) catalyzes the hydration of
l-KDA to α-ketoglutaric semialdehyde in the nonphosphorylative l-arabinose
pathway from bacteria and belongs to the dihydrodipicolinate synthase
(DHDPS)/N-acetylneuraminate lyase (NAL) protein superfamily. All members of this 
superfamily, including several aldolases for l-KDA, share a common catalytic
mechanism of retro-aldol fission, in which a lysine residue forms a Schiff base
with the carbonyl C2 atom of the substrate, followed by proton abstraction of the
substrate by a tyrosine residue as the base catalyst. Only AraD possesses a
glutamine residue instead of this active site tyrosine, suggesting its
involvement in catalysis. We herein determined the crystal structures of AraD
from the nitrogen-fixing bacterium Azospirillum brasilense and AraD in complex
with β-hydroxypyruvate and 2-oxobutyrate, two substrate analogues, at resolutions
of 1.9, 1.6, and 2.2 Å, respectively. In both of the complexed structures, the
ε-nitrogen of the conserved Lys171 was covalently linked to the carbonyl C2 atom 
of the ligand, which was consistent with the Schiff base intermediate form,
similar to other DHDPS/NAL members. A site-directed mutagenic study revealed that
Glu173 and Glu200 played important roles as base catalysts, whereas Gln143 was
not absolutely essential. The abstraction of one of the C3 protons of the
substrate (but not the O4 hydroxyl) by Glu173 was similar to that by the
(conserved) tyrosine residues in the two DHDPS/NAL members that produce
α-ketoglutaric semialdehyde (d-5-keto-4-deoxygalactarate dehydratase and
Δ1-pyrroline-4-hydroxy-2-carboxylate deaminase), indicating that these enzymes
evolved convergently despite similarities in the overall reaction.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00515 
PMID: 32697085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

