
1. Water Res. 2020 Oct 1;184:116089. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2020.116089. Epub 2020
Jul 4.

Strong linkages between dissolved organic matter and the aquatic bacterial
community in an urban river.

Zhang L(1), Fang W(2), Li X(2), Lu W(3), Li J(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Chuzhou University, Chuzhou,
239000, China. Electronic address: leizhang2014@163.com.
(2)School of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Chuzhou University, Chuzhou,
239000, China.
(3)Fisheries Research Institute, Anhui Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hefei,
230036, China.

Aquatic bacterial communities play an important role in biogeochemical cycling in
river ecosystems; however, knowledge of the linkages between bacterial
communities and dissolved organic matter (DOM) in urban rivers is limited. Here, 
16S rRNA amplicon sequencing and parallel factor (PARAFAC) modeling of
excitation-emission fluorescence spectroscopy were used to analyze the
compositions, co-occurrence patterns, and interactions with chromophoric DOM
(CDOM) of bacterial communities in urban river water samples influenced by
different human activities. The results revealed that two protein-like components
accounted for 65.2 ± 9.56% of the total variability in all three fluorescence
components, which suggests that CDOM in urban rivers is mainly a microbial
source. In addition to pH and DO, CDOM is also an important factor affecting
bacterial community structure, and the main classes (Gammaproteobacteria and
Clostridia) and genera (Limnohabitans and Alpinimonas) showed strong positive
correlations with terrestrial humic-like C1 and tryptophan-like C2, respectively.
When autotrophic and heterotrophic bacteria coexist in urban rivers, the
production and degradation of CDOM will occur simultaneously. Furthermore, the
riverine bacterial co-occurrence network had a nonrandom modular structure, which
was mainly driven by classification correlation and bacterial function. The high 
abundance of genes related to xenobiotic metabolism, carbon metabolism and
nitrogen metabolism in the urban river indicated that anthropogenic activity may 
be the dominant selective force altering the bacterial communities. Overall, our 
results provide a novel view for the assembly of bacterial communities in urban
river ecosystems under the influence of different human activities.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2020.116089 
PMID: 32693265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

