
1. Infect Immun. 2020 Sep 18;88(10). pii: e00226-20. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00226-20.
Print 2020 Sep 18.

Diffusible Signal Factors Act through AraC-Type Transcriptional Regulators as
Chemical Cues To Repress Virulence of Enteric Pathogens.

Bosire EM(1), Eade CR(2), Schiltz CJ(3), Reid AJ(2), Troutman J(2), Chappie
JS(3), Altier C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA ebm82@cornell.edu.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte,
North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA.

Successful colonization by enteric pathogens is contingent upon effective
interactions with the host and the resident microbiota. These pathogens thus
respond to and integrate myriad signals to control virulence. Long-chain fatty
acids repress the virulence of the important enteric pathogens Salmonella
enterica and Vibrio cholerae by repressing AraC-type transcriptional regulators
in pathogenicity islands. While several fatty acids are known to be repressive,
we show here that cis-2-unsaturated fatty acids, a rare chemical class used as
diffusible signal factors (DSFs), are highly potent inhibitors of virulence
functions. We found that DSFs repressed virulence gene expression of enteric
pathogens by interacting with transcriptional regulators of the AraC family. In
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, DSFs repress the activity of HilD, an
AraC-type activator essential to the induction of epithelial cell invasion, by
both preventing its interaction with target DNA and inducing its rapid
degradation by Lon protease. cis-2-Hexadecenoic acid (c2-HDA), a DSF produced by 
Xylella fastidiosa, was the most potent among those tested, repressing the
HilD-dependent transcriptional regulator hilA and the type III secretion effector
sopB >200- and 68-fold, respectively. Further, c2-HDA attenuated the
transcription of the ToxT-dependent cholera toxin synthesis genes of V. cholerae 
c2-HDA significantly repressed invasion gene expression by Salmonella in the
murine colitis model, indicating that the HilD-dependent signaling pathway
functions within the complex milieu of the animal intestine. These data argue
that enteric pathogens respond to DSFs as interspecies signals to identify
appropriate niches in the gut for virulence activation, which could be exploited 
to control the virulence of enteric pathogens.

Copyright Â© 2020 Bosire et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00226-20 
PMCID: PMC7504960
PMID: 32690633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

