
1. Toxins (Basel). 2020 Jul 20;12(7). pii: E464. doi: 10.3390/toxins12070464.

Anthrax Edema and Lethal Toxins Differentially Target Human Lung and Blood
Phagocytes.

Patel VI(1), Booth JL(1), Dozmorov M(2), Brown BR(1), Metcalf JP(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary, Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, the
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
23298, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, the University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(4)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of inhalation anthrax, is a serious
concern as a bioterrorism weapon. The vegetative form produces two exotoxins:
Lethal toxin (LT) and edema toxin (ET). We recently characterized and compared
six human airway and alveolar-resident phagocyte (AARP) subsets at the
transcriptional and functional levels. In this study, we examined the effects of 
LT and ET on these subsets and human leukocytes. AARPs and leukocytes do not
express high levels of the toxin receptors, tumor endothelium marker-8 (TEM8) and
capillary morphogenesis protein-2 (CMG2). Less than 20% expressed surface TEM8,
while less than 15% expressed CMG2. All cell types bound or internalized
protective antigen, the common component of the two toxins, in a dose-dependent
manner. Most protective antigen was likely internalized via macropinocytosis.
Cells were not sensitive to LT-induced apoptosis or necrosis at concentrations up
to 1000 ng/mL. However, toxin exposure inhibited B. anthracis spore
internalization. This inhibition was driven primarily by ET in AARPs and LT in
leukocytes. These results support a model of inhalation anthrax in which spores
germinate and produce toxins. ET inhibits pathogen phagocytosis by AARPs,
allowing alveolar escape. In late-stage disease, LT inhibits phagocytosis by
leukocytes, allowing bacterial replication in the bloodstream.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12070464 
PMCID: PMC7405021
PMID: 32698436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

