
1. J Microbiol. 2020 Sep;58(9):750-760. doi: 10.1007/s12275-020-0130-4. Epub 2020
Jul 24.

The relationship between bacterial diversity and organic carbon mineralization in
soft rock and sand compound soil.

Guo Z(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Ge L(1)(2), Yang C(1)(2), Han J(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shaanxi Provincial Land Engineering Construction Group Co., Ltd., Xi'an,
710075, P. R. China.
(2)Institute of Land Engineering and Technology, Skaanxi Provincial Land
Engineering Construction Group Co., Ltd., Xi'an, 710075, P. R. China.
(3)Shaanxi Provincial Land Engineering Construction Group Co., Ltd., Xi'an,
710075, P. R. China. djyjy9209@126.com.
(4)Institute of Land Engineering and Technology, Skaanxi Provincial Land
Engineering Construction Group Co., Ltd., Xi'an, 710075, P. R. China.
djyjy9209@126.com.

The soil organic carbon (SOC) mineralization rate in sandy soil plays an
important role in improving soil quality, and a research is needed to determine
management practices that optimize the mineralization rate. When sandy soil is
improved by adding soft rock, the specific promotion process of bacterium to SOC 
mineralization remain unclear. To investigate these mechanisms, we selected four 
treatments with soft rock to sand volume ratios of 0:1 (CK), 1:5 (C1), 1:2 (C2)
and 1:1 (C3) to study. The mineralization rate of organic carbon was measured
using the lye absorption method. High-throughput sequencing and scanning electron
microscopy were used to determine the bacterial community structure and soil
microstructure, respectively. The results showed that the organic carbon content 
of the sandy soil increased significantly (182.22-276.43%) after using the soft
rock treatments. The SOC mineralization rate could be divided into two stages: a 
rapid decline during days 1-8 and a slow decline during days 8-60. With increased
incubation time, the intensity of the cumulative release of organic carbon
gradually weakened. Compared with the CK treatment, the SOC mineralization
accumulation (Ct) and the potential mineralizable organic carbon content (C0) in 
the C1, C2, and C3 treatments increased significantly, by 106.98-225.94% and
112.22-254.08%, respectively. The cumulative mineralization rate (Cr) was 18.11% 
and 21.38% smaller with treatments C2 and C3, respectively. The SOC
mineralization rate constant (k) decreased significantly after the addition of
soft rock, while the half-turnover period (Th) changed inversely with k. Compared
with the CK treatment, the number of gene copies of the soil bacteria increased
by 15.38-272.53% after adding soft rock, with the most significant increase in
treatment C3. The bacterial diversity index also increased significantly under
treatment C3. The three dominant bacteria were Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria,
and Chloroflexi. The correlation between Cr and one of the non-dominant bacteria,
Firmicutes, was large, and the bacteria had a significant positive correlation
with k. At the same time, the abundance of Firmicutes under treatments C2 and C3 
was small. As the proportion of soft rock increased, the soil particles changed
from point contact to surface contact, and the adhesion on the surface of the
particles gradually increased. Results from this study show that the retention
time of SOC can be increased and the carbon sequestration effect is better when
the ratio of soft rock to sand is set to 1:2.

DOI: 10.1007/s12275-020-0130-4 
PMID: 32710300 

