
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Jul 27;8(8). pii: E1135. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8081135.

Multidrug-Resistant Avian Pathogenic Escherichia coli Strains and Association of 
Their Virulence Genes in Bangladesh.

Saha O(1), Hoque MN(1)(2), Islam OK(1)(3), Rahaman MM(1), Sultana M(1), Hossain
MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Reproductive Health, Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Agricultural University, Gazipur-1706, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Jashore University of Science and Technology,
Jashore-7408, Bangladesh.

The avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC) strains are the chief etiology of
colibacillosis worldwide. The present study investigated the circulating
phylotypes, existence of virulence genes (VGs), and antimicrobial resistance
(AMR) in 392 APEC isolates, obtained from 130 samples belonged to six farms using
both phenotypic and PCR-based molecular approaches. Congo red binding (CRB) assay
confirmed 174 APEC isolates which were segregated into ten, nine, and eight
distinct genotypes by RAPD assay (discriminatory index, DI = 0.8707), BOX-PCR (DI
= 0.8591) and ERIC-PCR (DI = 0.8371), respectively. The combination of three
phylogenetic markers (chuA, yjaA and DNA fragment TspE4.C2) classified APEC
isolates into B23 (37.36%), A1 (33.91%), D2 (11.49%), B22 (9.20%), and B1 (8.05%)
phylotypes. Majority of the APEC isolates (75-100%) harbored VGs (ial, fimH, crl,
papC, and cjrC). These VGs (papC and cjrC) and phylotypes (D2 and B2) of APEC had
significant (p = 0.004) association with colibacillosis. Phylogenetic analysis
showed two distinct clades (clade A and clade B) of APEC, where clade A had
98-100% similarity with E. coli APEC O78 and E. coli EHEC strains, and clade B
had closest relationship with E. coli O169:H41 strain. Interestingly, phylogroups
B2 and D2 were found in the APEC strains of both clades, while the strains from
phylogroups A1 and B1 were found in clade A only. In this study, 81.71% of the
isolates were biofilm formers, and possessed plasmids of varying ranges (1.0 to
54 kb). In vitro antibiogram profiling revealed that 100% isolates were resistant
to â‰¥3 antibiotics, of which 61.96%, 55.24%, 53.85%, 51.16% and 45.58% isolates in
phylotypes B1, D2, B22, B23, and A1, respectively, were resistant to these
antimicrobials. The resistance patterns varied among different phylotypes,
notably in phylotype B22, showing the highest resistance to ampicillin (90.91%), 
nalidixic acid (90.11%), tetracycline (83.72%), and nitrofurantoin (65.12%).
Correspondence analysis also showed significant correlation among phylotypes with
CRB (p = 0.008), biofilm formation (p = 0.02), drug resistance (p = 0.03), and
VGs (p = 0.06). This report demonstrated that B2 and A1 phylotypes are dominantly
circulating APEC phylotypes in Bangladesh; however, B2 and D2 are strongly
associated with the pathogenicity. A high prevalence of antibiotic-resistant APEC
strains from different phylotypes suggest the use of organic antimicrobial
compounds, and/or metals, and the rotational use of antibiotics in poultry farms 
in Bangladesh.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8081135 
PMCID: PMC7465658
PMID: 32727140 

