
1. G3 (Bethesda). 2020 Sep 2;10(9):2975-2979. doi: 10.1534/g3.120.401365.

The Complete Genome Sequence of the Staphylococcus Bacteriophage Metroid.

Crane A(1)(2), Abaidoo J(1), Beltran G(1), Fry D(1), Furey C(1), Green N(1),
Johal R(1), La Rosa B(1), Jimenez CL(1), Luong L(1), Maag G(1), Porche J(1),
Reyes L(1), Robinson A(1), Sabbara S(1), Herrera LS(1), Negrete AU(1), Wilson
P(1), Geiler-Samerotte K(1)(3), Pfeifer SP(4)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
(2)Center for Evolution and Medicine, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
(3)Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
susanne.pfeifer@asu.edu.

Phages infecting bacteria of the genus Staphylococcus play an important role in
their host's ecology and evolution. On one hand, horizontal gene transfer from
phage can encourage the rapid adaptation of pathogenic Staphylococcus enabling
them to escape host immunity or access novel environments. On the other hand,
lytic phages are promising agents for the treatment of bacterial infections,
especially those resistant to antibiotics. As part of an ongoing effort to gain
novel insights into bacteriophage diversity, we characterized the complete genome
of the Staphylococcus bacteriophage Metroid, a cluster C phage with a genome size
of 151kb, encompassing 254 predicted protein-coding genes as well as 4 tRNAs. A
comparative genomic analysis highlights strong similarities - including a
conservation of the lysis cassette - with other Staphylococcus cluster C
bacteriophages, several of which were previously characterized for therapeutic
applications.

Copyright Â© 2020 Crane et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.120.401365 
PMCID: PMC7466978
PMID: 32727926 

