
1. PLoS One. 2020 Aug 3;15(8):e0236823. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0236823.
eCollection 2020.

Unraveling the mechanisms of resistance to Sclerotium rolfsii in peanut (Arachis 
hypogaea L.) using comparative RNA-Seq analysis of resistant and susceptible
genotypes.

Bosamia TC(1), Dodia SM(1), Mishra GP(1)(2), Ahmad S(1), Joshi B(1),
Thirumalaisamy PP(1), Kumar N(1), Rathnakumar AL(1), Sangh C(1), Kumar A(1)(3),
Thankappan R(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICAR-Directorate of Groundnut Research (ICAR-DGR), Junagadh, India.
(2)Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi, India.
(3)ICAR-National Research Centre on Litchi, Muzaffarpur, India.

Stem rot, a devastating fungal disease of peanut, is caused by Sclerotium
rolfsii. RNA-sequencing approaches have been used to unravel the mechanisms of
resistance to stem rot in peanut over the course of fungal infection in resistant
(NRCG-CS85) and susceptible (TG37A) genotypes under control conditions and during
the course of infection. Out of about 290 million reads, nearly 251 million
(92.22%) high-quality reads were obtained and aligned to the Arachis duranensis
and Arachis ipaensis genomes with the average mapping of 78.91% and 78.61%,
respectively. In total, about 48.6% of genes were commonly regulated, while
approximately 21.8% and 29.6% of uniquely regulated genes from A. duranensis and 
A. ipaensis genomes, respectively, were identified. Several annotated
transcripts, such as receptor-like kinases, jasmonic acid pathway enzymes, and
transcription factors (TFs), including WRKY, Zinc finger protein, and C2-H2 zinc 
finger, showed higher expression in resistant genotypes upon infection. These
transcripts have a known role in channelizing the downstream of pathogen
perception. The higher expression of WRKY transcripts might have induced the
systemic acquired resistance (SAR) by the activation of the jasmonic acid defense
signaling pathway. Furthermore, a set of 30 transcripts involved in the defense
mechanisms were validated with quantitative real-time PCR. This study suggested
PAMP-triggered immunity as a probable mechanism of resistance, while the jasmonic
acid signaling pathway was identified as a possible defense mechanism in peanut. 
The information generated is of immense importance in developing more effective
ways to combat the stem rot disease in peanut.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0236823 
PMCID: PMC7398544
PMID: 32745143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No. The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

