
1. Animals (Basel). 2020 Jul 30;10(8). pii: E1316. doi: 10.3390/ani10081316.

Effects of Replacing Extruded Maize by Dried Citrus Pulp in a Mixed Diet on
Ruminal Fermentation, Methane Production, and Microbial Populations in Rusitec
Fermenters.

García-Rodríguez J(1)(2), Saro C(1)(2), Mateos I(1)(2), González JS(1)(2), Carro 
MD(3), Ranilla MJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Producción Animal, Universidad de León, 24007 León, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Ganadería de Montaña, CSIC-Universidad de León, Finca Marzanas
s/n, 24346 Grulleros, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Producción Agraria, Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería
Agronómica, Agroalimentaria y de Biosistemas, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 
Ciudad Universitaria, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

Citrus pulp is a highly abundant by-product of the citrus industry. The aim of
this study was to assess the effects of replacing extruded maize (EM; 20% of
total diet) by dried citrus pulp (DCP; 20%) in a mixed diet on rumen fermentation
and microbial populations in Rusitec fermenters. The two diets contained 50%
alfalfa hay and 50% concentrate, and the same protein level. Four Rusitec
fermenters were used in a cross-over design with two 13-d incubation runs. After 
7-d of diet adaptation, diet disappearance, fermentation parameters, microbial
growth, and microbial populations were assessed. Fermenters receiving the DCP
showed greater pH values and fiber disappearance (p < 0.001) and lower methane
production (p = 0.03) than those fed EM. Replacing EM by DCP caused an increase
in the proportions of propionate and butyrate (p < 0.001) and a decrease in
acetate (p = 0.04). Microbial growth, bacterial diversity, and the quantity of
bacteria and protozoa DNA were not affected by the diet, but the relative
abundances of fungi and archaea were greater (p < 0.03) in solid and liquid
phases of DCP fermenters, respectively. Results indicate that DCP can substitute 
EM, promoting a more efficient ruminal fermentation.

DOI: 10.3390/ani10081316 
PMCID: PMC7460359
PMID: 32751690 

