
1. Molecules. 2020 Aug 1;25(15). pii: E3523. doi: 10.3390/molecules25153523.

Cranberry Polyphenols and Prevention against Urinary Tract Infections: Relevant
Considerations.

González de Llano D(1), Moreno-Arribas MV(1), Bartolomé B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Science Research (CIAL), CSIC-UAM, Nicolás Cabrera, 9,
Campus de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Cranberry (Vaccinium macrocarpon) is a distinctive source of polyphenols as
flavonoids and phenolic acids that has been described to display beneficial
effects against urinary tract infections (UTIs), the second most common type of
infections worldwide. UTIs can lead to significant morbidity, especially in
healthy females due to high rates of recurrence and antibiotic resistance.
Strategies and therapeutic alternatives to antibiotics for prophylaxis and
treatment against UTIs are continuously being sought after. Different to
cranberry, which have been widely recommended in traditional medicine for UTIs
prophylaxis, probiotics have emerged as a new alternative to the use of
antibiotics against these infections and are the subject of new research in this 
area. Besides uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC), the most common bacteria
causing uncomplicated UTIs, other etiological agents, such as
Klebsiellapneumoniae or Gram-positive bacteria of Enterococcus and Staphylococcus
genera, seem to be more widespread than previously appreciated. Considerable
current effort is also devoted to the still-unraveled mechanisms that are behind 
the UTI-protective effects of cranberry, probiotics and their new combined
formulations. All these current topics in the understanding of the protective
effects of cranberry against UTIs are reviewed in this paper. Further progresses 
expected in the coming years in these fields are also discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25153523 
PMCID: PMC7436188
PMID: 32752183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

