
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Aug 4;10(1):13135. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-70010-4.

The AAA + ATPase valosin-containing protein (VCP)/p97/Cdc48 interaction network
in Leishmania.

Aguiar BG(1)(2)(3), Dumas C(1)(2), Maaroufi H(4), Padmanabhan PK(1)(2),
Papadopoulou B(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease and Immunity, CHU de Quebec Research
Center-Laval University, 2705 Laurier Blvd, Quebec, QC, G1V 4G2, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology-Infectious Disease and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine, University Laval, Quebec, QC, G1V 4G2, Canada.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, Federal University of Piauí, Teresina,
Brazil.
(4)Institut de Biologie Intégrative Et Des Systèmes (IBIS), Laval University,
Quebec, QC, Canada.
(5)Division of Infectious Disease and Immunity, CHU de Quebec Research
Center-Laval University, 2705 Laurier Blvd, Quebec, QC, G1V 4G2, Canada.
barbara.papadopoulou@crchudequebec.ulaval.ca.
(6)Department of Microbiology-Infectious Disease and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine, University Laval, Quebec, QC, G1V 4G2, Canada.
barbara.papadopoulou@crchudequebec.ulaval.ca.

Valosin-containing protein (VCP)/p97/Cdc48 is an AAA + ATPase associated with
many ubiquitin-dependent cellular pathways that are central to protein quality
control. VCP binds various cofactors, which determine pathway selectivity and
substrate processing. Here, we used co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry 
studies coupled to in silico analyses to identify the Leishmania infantum VCP
(LiVCP) interactome and to predict molecular interactions between LiVCP and its
major cofactors. Our data support a largely conserved VCP protein network in
Leishmania including known but also novel interaction partners. Network
proteomics analysis confirmed LiVCP-cofactor interactions and provided novel
insights into cofactor-specific partners and the diversity of LiVCP complexes,
including the well-characterized VCP-UFD1-NPL4 complex. Gene Ontology analysis
coupled with digitonin fractionation and immunofluorescence studies support
cofactor subcellular compartmentalization with either cytoplasmic or organellar
or vacuolar localization. Furthermore, in silico models based on 3D homology
modeling and protein-protein docking indicated that the conserved binding modules
of LiVCP cofactors, except for NPL4, interact with specific binding sites in the 
hexameric LiVCP protein, similarly to their eukaryotic orthologs. Altogether,
these results allowed us to build the first VCP protein interaction network in
parasitic protozoa through the identification of known and novel interacting
partners potentially associated with distinct VCP complexes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-70010-4 
PMCID: PMC7403338
PMID: 32753747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

