
1. Autophagy. 2020 Aug 7:1-17. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2020.1794590. [Epub ahead of
print]

A chemical genomics-aggrephagy integrated method studying functional analysis of 
autophagy inducers.

Kataura T(1)(2), Tashiro E(1), Nishikawa S(1), Shibahara K(1), Muraoka Y(1),
Miura M(1), Sakai S(1), Katoh N(1), Totsuka M(1), Onodera M(3), Shin-Ya
K(4)(5)(6), Miyamoto K(7), Sasazawa Y(1)(7), Hattori N(7), Saiki S(7), Imoto
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Keio University , Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) ,
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Immunology, National Center for Child Health and Development ,
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology , Tokyo,
Japan.
(5)Biotechnology Research Centre, The University of Tokyo , Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Collaborative Research Institute for Innovative Microbiology, The University
of Tokyo , Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine , Tokyo,
Japan.

Macroautophagy/autophagy plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of various
human diseases including neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson disease
(PD) and Huntington disease (HD). Chemical autophagy inducers are expected to
serve as disease-modifying agents by eliminating cytotoxic/damaged proteins.
Although many autophagy inducers have been identified, their precise molecular
mechanisms are not fully understood because of the complicated crosstalk among
signaling pathways. To address this issue, we performed several chemical genomic 
analyses enabling us to comprehend the dominancy among the autophagy-associated
pathways followed by an aggresome-clearance assay. In a first step, more than 400
target-established small molecules were assessed for their ability to activate
autophagic flux in neuronal PC12D cells, and we identified 39 compounds as
autophagy inducers. We then profiled the autophagy inducers by testing their
effect on the induction of autophagy by 200 well-established signal transduction 
modulators. Our principal component analysis (PCA) and clustering analysis using 
a dataset of "autophagy profiles" revealed that two Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)-approved drugs, memantine and clemastine, activate endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress responses, which could lead to autophagy induction. We also confirmed
that SMK-17, a recently identified autophagy inducer, induced autophagy via the
PRKC/PKC-TFEB pathway, as had been predicted from PCA. Finally, we showed that
almost all of the autophagy inducers tested in this present work significantly
enhanced the clearance of the protein aggregates observed in cellular models of
PD and HD. These results, with the combined approach, suggested that
autophagy-activating small molecules may improve proteinopathies by eliminating
nonfunctional protein aggregates.ABBREVIATIONS: ADK: adenosine kinase; AMPK:
AMP-activated protein kinase; ATF4: activating transcription factor 4; BECN1:
beclin-1; DDIT3/CHOP: DNA damage inducible transcript 3; EIF2AK3/PERK: eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2 alpha kinase 3; EIF2S1/eIF2α: eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2 subunit alpha; ER: endoplasmic reticulum;
ERN1/IRE1α: endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus signaling 1; FDA: Food and Drug
Administration; GSH: glutathione; HD: Huntington disease; HSPA5/GRP78: heat shock
protein family A (Hsp70) member 5; HTT: huntingtin; JAK: Janus kinase,
MAP1LC3B/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MAP2K/MEK:
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase; MAP3K8/Tpl2: mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase kinase 8; MAPK: mitogen-activated protein kinase; MPP+:
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; MTORC:
MTOR complex; NAC: N-acetylcysteine; NGF: nerve growth factor 2; NMDA:
N-methyl-D-aspartate; PCA: principal component analysis; PD: Parkinson disease;
PDA: pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; PIK3C3: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
catalytic subunit type 3; PMA: phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate; PRKC/PKC: protein
kinase C; ROCK: Rho-associated coiled-coil protein kinase; RR: ribonucleotide
reductase; SIGMAR1: sigma non-opioid intracellular receptor 1; SQSTM1/p62:
sequestosome 1; STK11/LKB1: serine/threonine kinase 11; TFEB: Transcription
factor EB; TGFB/TGF-β: Transforming growth factor beta; ULK1: unc-51 like
autophagy activating kinase 1; XBP1: X-box binding protein 1.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2020.1794590 
PMID: 32762399 

