
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jul 16;11:1519. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01519. eCollection
2020.

The CD28 Transmembrane Domain Contains an Essential Dimerization Motif.

Leddon SA(1), Fettis MM(1), Abramo K(1), Kelly R(1), Oleksyn D(1), Miller J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, David H. Smith Center for Vaccine
Biology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY,
United States.

CD28 plays a critical role in regulating immune responses both by enhancing
effector T cell activation and differentiation and controlling the development
and function of regulatory T cells. CD28 is expressed at the cell surface as a
disulfide linked homodimer that is thought to bind ligand monovalently. How
ligand binding triggers CD28 to induce intracellular signaling as well as the
proximal signaling pathways that are induced are not well-understood. In
addition, recent data suggest inside-out signaling initiated by the T cell
antigen receptor can enhance CD28 ligand binding, possibly by inducing a
rearrangement of the CD28 dimer interface to allow for bivalent binding. To
understand how possible conformational changes during ligand-induced receptor
triggering and inside-out signaling are mediated, we examined the CD28
transmembrane domain. We identified an evolutionarily conserved YxxxxT motif that
is shared with CTLA-4 and resembles the transmembrane dimerization motif within
CD3ζ. We show that the CD28 transmembrane domain can drive protein dimerization
in a bacterial expression system at levels equivalent to the well-known
glycophorin A transmembrane dimerization motif. In addition, ectopic expression
of the CD28 transmembrane domain into monomeric human CD25 can drive dimerization
in murine T cells as detected by an increase in FRET by flow cytometry. Mutation 
of the polar YxxxxT motif to hydrophobic leucine residues (Y145L/T150L)
attenuated CD28 transmembrane mediated dimerization in both the bacterial and
mammalian assays. Introduction of the Y145L/T150L mutation of the CD28
transmembrane dimerization motif into the endogenous CD28 locus by CRISPR
resulted in a dramatic loss in CD28 cell surface expression. These data suggest
that under physiological conditions the YxxxxT dimerization motif within the CD28
transmembrane domain plays a critical role in the assembly and/or expression of
stable CD28 dimers at the cell surface.

Copyright © 2020 Leddon, Fettis, Abramo, Kelly, Oleksyn and Miller.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01519 
PMCID: PMC7378745
PMID: 32765524 

