
1. Genes (Basel). 2020 Aug 5;11(8). pii: E890. doi: 10.3390/genes11080890.

Increased Accumulation of Medium-Chain Fatty Acids by Dynamic Degradation of
Long-Chain Fatty Acids in Mucor circinelloides.

Hussain SA(1)(2), Garcia A(2), Khan MAK(1), Nosheen S(1), Zhang Y(1), Koffas
MAG(3), Garre V(4), Lee SC(2), Song Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Colin Ratledge Center for Microbial Lipids, School of Agriculture Engineering 
and Food Science, Shandong University of Technology, Zibo 255049, China.
(2)Department of Biology, South Texas Center of Emerging Infectious Diseases
(STCEID), University of Texas, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Center for Biotechnology
and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, 
USA.
(4)Departamento de Genética y Microbiología (Unidadasociada al IQFR-CSIC),
Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Murcia, 30071 Murcia, Spain.

Concerns about global warming, fossil-fuel depletion, food security, and human
health have promoted metabolic engineers to develop tools/strategies to
overproduce microbial functional oils directly from renewable resources.
Medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs, C8-C12) have been shown to be important sources 
due to their diverse biotechnological importance, providing benefits ranging from
functional lipids to uses in bio-fuel production. However, oleaginous microbes do
not carry native pathways for the production of MCFAs, and therefore, diverse
approaches have been adapted to compensate for the requirements of industrial
demand. Mucor circinelloides is a promising organism for lipid production (15-36%
cell dry weight; CDW) and the investigation of mechanisms of lipid accumulation; 
however, it mostly produces long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs). To address this
challenge, we genetically modified strain M. circinelloides MU758, first by
integrating heterologous acyl-ACP thioesterase (TE) into fatty acid synthase
(FAS) complex and subsequently by modifying the β-oxidation pathway by disrupting
the acyl-CoA oxidase (ACOX) and/or acyl-CoA thioesterase (ACOT) genes with a
preference for medium-chain acyl-CoAs, to elevate the yield of MCFAs. The
resultant mutant strains (M-1, M-2, and M-3, respectively) showed a significant
increase in lipid production in comparison to the wild-type strain (WT). MCFAs in
M-1 (47.45%) was sharply increased compared to the wild type strain (2.25%), and 
it was further increased in M-2 (60.09%) suggesting a negative role of ACOX in
MCFAs production. However, MCFAs in M-3 were much decreased compared to
M-1,suggesting a positive role of ACOT in MCFAs production. The M-2 strain showed
maximum lipid productivity (~1800 milligram per liter per day or mg/L.d) and
MCFAs productivity (~1100 mg/L.d). Taken together, this study elaborates on how
the combination of two multidimensional approaches, TE gene over-expression and
modification of the β-oxidation pathway via substantial knockout of specific ACOX
gene, significantly increased the production of MCFAs. This synergistic approach 
ultimately offers a novel opportunity for synthetic/industrial biologists to
increase the content of MCFAs.

DOI: 10.3390/genes11080890 
PMCID: PMC7464202
PMID: 32764225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

