
1. Biochem J. 2020 Sep 18;477(17):3167-3182. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20200552.

Characterization of the different oligomeric states of the DAN family antagonists
SOSTDC1 and SOST.

Gipson GR(#)(1), Kattamuri C(#)(1), Czepnik M(1), Thompson TB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati, Medical Sciences Building, Cincinnati, OH 45267, U.S.A.
(#)Contributed equally

The DAN (differential screening-selected gene aberrative in neuroblastoma) family
are a group of secreted extracellular proteins which typically bind to and
antagonize BMP (bone morphogenetic protein) ligands. Previous studies have
revealed discrepancies between the oligomerization state of certain DAN family
members, with SOST (a poor antagonist of BMP signaling) forming a monomer while
Grem1, Grem2, and NBL1 (more potent BMP antagonists) form non-disulfide linked
dimers. The protein SOSTDC1 (Sclerostin domain containing protein 1) is
sequentially similar to SOST, but has been shown to be a better BMP inhibitor. In
order to determine the oligomerization state of SOSTDC1 and determine what effect
dimerization might have on the mechanism of DAN family antagonism of BMP
signaling, we isolated the SOSTDC1 protein and, using a battery of biophysical,
biochemical, and structural techniques, showed that SOSTDC1 forms a highly stable
non-covalent dimer. Additionally, this SOSTDC1 dimer was shown, using an in vitro
cell based assay system, to be an inhibitor of multiple BMP signaling growth
factors, including GDF5, while monomeric SOST was a very poor antagonist. These
results demonstrate that SOSTDC1 is distinct from paralogue SOST in terms of both
oligomerization and strength of BMP inhibition.

Â© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20200552 
PMCID: PMC7473711
PMID: 32779697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

