
1. J Immunol Res. 2020 Jul 21;2020:8935694. doi: 10.1155/2020/8935694. eCollection
2020.

Altered Regulatory B Cell Subsets in Children with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus.

El-Mokhtar MA(1), Elsherbiny NM(1), Sayed D(2), Raafat DM(3), Askar E(3), Hussein
A(3), Abdel-Malek MAY(4), Shalaby AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut
University, Egypt.
(2)Department of Clinical Pathology, South Egypt Cancer Institute, Assiut
University, Egypt.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut University, Egypt.
(4)Assiut University Children's Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut University,
Egypt.

B regulatory cells (Breg) refer to characteristic subsets of B cells that
generally exert anti-inflammatory functions and maintain peripheral tolerance
mainly through their ability to secrete interleukin-10 (IL10). Dysregulation in
the function of Breg cells was reported in several autoimmune diseases. However, 
the relation between Breg and children with type 1 diabetes (T1D) is poorly
understood. Thus, this study is aimed at determining whether Breg cells play a
role in T1D in children or not, so we hypothesized that an altered phenotype of B
cell subsets is associated with T1D in children. Children with T1D (n = 29) and
control children with normal blood glucose levels (n = 14) were recruited. The
percentages of different circulating IL10-producing Breg subsets, including B10, 
immature transitional, and plasmablasts were determined using flow cytometry
analysis. Furthermore, the association between different IL10-producing B cells
and patient parameters was investigated. The percentage of circulating
IL10+CD24hiCD27+ (B10) and IL10+CD24hiCD38hi (immature transitional) subsets of
Breg cells was significantly lower in T1D patients than in healthy controls.
Moreover, these cells were also negatively correlated with fasting blood glucose 
and HbA1c levels. Breg cells did not correlate with autoantibody levels in the
serum. These findings suggest that certain Breg subsets are numerically deficient
in children with T1D. This alteration in frequency is associated with deficient
islet function and glycemia. These findings suggest that Breg cells may be
involved in the loss of auto-tolerance and consequent destruction of pancreatic
cells and could, therefore, be a potential target for immunotherapy.

Copyright Â© 2020 Mohamed A. El-Mokhtar et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/8935694 
PMCID: PMC7391103
PMID: 32775471 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

