
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Aug 10;16(8):e1008697. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008697.
eCollection 2020 Aug.

Resistance to Bacillus thuringiensis Cry1Ac toxin requires mutations in two
Plutella xylostella ATP-binding cassette transporter paralogs.

Liu Z(1)(2)(3), Fu S(1)(2)(3), Ma X(1)(2)(3)(4), Baxter SW(2)(3)(5), Vasseur
L(2)(3)(6), Xiong L(1)(2)(3), Huang Y(1)(2)(3), Yang G(1)(2)(3), You S(1)(2)(3), 
You M(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ecological Pest Control for Fujian-Taiwan Crops and
College of Life Science, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou,
China.
(2)Institute of Applied Ecology, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University,
Fuzhou, China.
(3)Joint International Research Laboratory of Ecological Pest Control, Ministry
of Education, Fuzhou, China.
(4)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Biological Resources and Genetic Engineering,
College of Life Science and Technology, Xinjiang University, Urumqi, China.
(5)School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, Brock University, St. Catharines, Ontario, 
Canada.

The diamondback moth, Plutella xylostella, is a cosmopolitan pest and the first
species to develop field resistance to toxins from the gram-positive bacterium
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). Although previous work has suggested that mutations 
of ATP-binding cassette transporter subfamily C2 (ABCC2) or C3 (ABCC3) genes can 
confer Cry1Ac resistance, here we reveal that P. xylostella requires combined
mutations in both PxABCC2 and PxABCC3 to achieve high-level Cry1Ac resistance,
rather than simply a mutation of either gene. We identified natural mutations of 
PxABCC2 and PxABCC3 that concurrently occurred in a Cry1Ac-resistant strain
(Cry1S1000) of P. xylostella, with a mutation (RA2) causing the mis-splicing of
PxABCC2 and another mutation (RA3) leading to the premature termination of
PxABCC3. Genetic linkage analysis showed that RA2 and RA3 were tightly linked to 
Cry1Ac resistance. Introgression of RA2 and RA3 enabled a susceptible strain
(G88) of P. xylostella to obtain high resistance to Cry1Ac, confirming that these
genes confer resistance. To further support the role of PxABCC2 and PxABCC3 in
Cry1Ac resistance, frameshift mutations were introduced into PxABCC2 and PxABCC3 
singly and in combination in the G88 strain with CRISPR/Cas9 mediated
mutagenesis. Bioassays of CRISPR-based mutant strains, plus genetic
complementation tests, demonstrated that the deletion of PxABCC2 or PxABCC3 alone
provided < 4-fold tolerance to Cry1Ac, while disruption of both genes together
conferred >8,000-fold resistance to Cry1Ac, suggesting the
redundant/complementary roles of PxABCC2 and PxABCC3. This work advances our
understanding of Bt resistance in P. xylostella by demonstrating mutations within
both PxABCC2 and PxABCC3 genes are required for high-level Cry1Ac resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008697 
PMCID: PMC7446926
PMID: 32776976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

