
1. Insects. 2020 Aug 8;11(8). pii: E514. doi: 10.3390/insects11080514.

'Candidatus Liberibacter Solanacearum' Is Unlikely to Be Transmitted
Spontaneously from Infected Carrot Plants to Citrus Plants by Trioza Erytreae.

Quintana-González de Chaves M(1), Teresani GR(2), Hernández-Suárez E(1),
Bertolini E(3), Moreno A(4), Fereres A(4), Cambra M(5), Siverio F(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Protección Vegetal, Instituto Canario de Investigaciones
Agrarias (ICIA), Crta. El Boquerón s/n, 38270 La Laguna, Spain.
(2)APTA-Instituto Agronômico (IAC)-Centro de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento de
Fitossanidade, Campinas 13020-902, Brazil.
(3)Faculdade de Agronomia, Departamento de Fitosanidade, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Avenida Bento Gonçalves 7712, Porto Alegre 91540-000, 
Brazil.
(4)Instituto de Ciencias Agrarias, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas (CSIC), Calle Serrano, 115, 28006 Madrid, Spain.
(5)Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (IVIA), Centro de Protección 
Vegetal y Biotecnología, Carretera CV-315, Km 10.7, 46113 Moncada, Spain.
(6)Sección de Laboratorio de Sanidad Vegetal, Consejería de Agricultura,
Ganadería y Pesca, Gobierno de Canarias, Ctra. El Boquerón s/n, 28270 La Laguna, 
Spain.

Bacteria belonging to 'Candidatus Liberibacter spp.' are associated with various 
severe diseases in the five continents. The African citrus psyllid Trioza
erytreae (Hemiptera: Triozidae) is an efficient vector of citrus
huanglongbing-HLB disease, absent in the Mediterranean basin. This psyllid is
currently present in the islands and mainland Portugal and Spain, where the
prevalence of 'Ca. Liberibacter solanacearum' (CaLsol) associated to a carrot
disease is high. Trioza erytreae normally feeds on citrus plants but has also
been observed on other crops. It would be a great concern to the Mediterranean
citrus industry if T. erytreae could transmit this bacterium from carrots to
citrus and cause disease; therefore, the transmission of CaLsol from carrot
plants to citrus plants was experimentally assessed. Although CaLsol was
initially detected on receptor citrus plants in transmission assays by dodder and
budding, the infection was not established. The feeding behavior by electrical
penetration graphs and oviposition of T. erytreae on carrot plants versus citrus 
plants was evaluated. Trioza erytreae only reached the phloem in citrus plants.
However, it was able to acquire CaLsol from infected carrots but unable to
transmit it to citrus plants. CaLsol was detected in some carrot plants
immediately after 7 and 14 days (inoculation access period), but it was not
detected after one month. Trioza erytreae was unable to complete its life cycle
on carrot plants. In conclusion, the efficient vector of bacteria associated to
huanglongbing was unable to transmit CaLsol from carrot to citrus plants, but it 
acquired and transmitted the bacterium from carrot to carrot plants with low
efficiency.

DOI: 10.3390/insects11080514 
PMCID: PMC7469162
PMID: 32784442 

