
1. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2020 Nov;116:111230. doi:
10.1016/j.msec.2020.111230. Epub 2020 Jun 22.

Synthesized OH-radical rich bacteria cellulosic pockets with photodynamic
bacteria inactivation properties against S. ureus and E. coli.

Narh C(1), Badoe W(2), Howard EK(2), Lin NX(1), Mensah A(1), Wang T(1), Wang
Q(1), Huang F(1), Wei Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fiber Composite Research Center, Jiangnan University, Ministry of Education
Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, China.
(2)Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ashanti Region,
Ghana.
(3)Fiber Composite Research Center, Jiangnan University, Ministry of Education
Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, China. Electronic address: qfwei@jiangnan.edu.cn.

Inulin as an external carbon source was used as the fructose substitute to
Gluconacetobacter xylinus (ATCC 10245) bacterial strain in a successful synthesis
of cellulosic pockets to be used in drug delivery and storage. It was observed
that inulobiose trans conformation was in agreement with ϕ = Ψ = ω = 180° and
angular rotation of ϴ (C1-C2-0-CI''), ϴ (C2-0-C 1'-C2') and ϴ (0-C1'-C2'-0')
respectively. A bacterial susceptibility test revealed a successful inactivation 
of Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli in the presence of photons. Fourier
Transform Infrared Spectroscopy analysis confirmed an OH absorption was verified 
at 3423 cm-1. Pocket drug uptake test revealed a highly absorbent structure with 
the thermal stability directly proportional to the increase in drug uptake, while
the increase in the degree of polymerization resulted in the increase in
antioxidant activity and rate of bacterial inactivation. HYPOTHESIS: Inulin as an
inert polysaccharide is neutral to cellular activity, therefore, could not be an 
agent for bacteria inactivation.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2020.111230 
PMID: 32806321 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We the authors 
of the above- mentioned article wish to declare that there is no conflict of
interest or whatsoever that will affect the processing of this article in any
way.

