
1. Metab Eng. 2020 Nov;62:221-234. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2020.08.007. Epub 2020 Aug
20.

Engineering Corynebacterium glutamicum with a comprehensive genomic library and
phage-based vectors.

Marques F(1), Luzhetskyy A(2), Mendes MV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering and Synthetic Microbiology Group, i3S- Instituto de
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto,
Portugal; IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do
Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal; ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel
Salazar, Universidade do Porto, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal; Pharmazeutische
Biotechnologie, Universität des Saarlandes, Campus C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken,
Germany.
(2)Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie, Universität des Saarlandes, Campus C2.3, 66123
Saarbrücken, Germany; Helmholtz-Institut für Pharmazeutische Forschung Saarland, 
Campus E8.1, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address:
a.luzhetskyy@mx.uni-saarland.de.
(3)Bioengineering and Synthetic Microbiology Group, i3S- Instituto de
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto,
Portugal; IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do
Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal; ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel
Salazar, Universidade do Porto, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal. Electronic address:
mvm@ibmc.up.pt.

The Gram-positive bacterium Corynebacterium glutamicum sustains the industrial
production of chiral molecules such as L-amino acids. Through heterologous gene
expression, C. glutamicum is becoming a sustainable source of small organic
molecules and added-value chemicals. The current methods to implement
heterologous genes in C. glutamicum rely on replicative vectors requiring lasting
selection or chromosomal integration using homologous recombination. Here, we
present a set of dedicated and transversal tools for genome editing and gene
delivery into C. glutamicum. We generated a cosmid-based library suitable for
efficient double allelic exchange, covering more than 94% of the chromosome with 
an average 5.1x coverage. We employed the library and an iterative marker
excision system to generate the carotenoid-free C. glutamicumBT1-C31-Albino (BCA)
host, featuring the attachment sites for actinophages ϕC31 and ϕBT1 for one-step 
chromosomal integration. As a proof-of-principle, we employed a ϕC31-based
integration and a Cre system for the markerless expression of the type III
polyketide synthase RppA, and a ϕBT1-based integration system for the expression 
of the phosphopantetheinylation-dependent non-ribosomal peptide synthetase BpsA
in the C. glutamicum BCA host. The developed genomic library and microbial host, 
and the characterized molecular tools will contribute to the study of the
physiology and the rise of C. glutamicum as a leading host for drug discovery.

Copyright © 2020 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2020.08.007 
PMID: 32827704 

