
1. Biomolecules. 2020 Aug 15;10(8). pii: E1187. doi: 10.3390/biom10081187.

Naphthoquinone-Based Meroterpenoids from Marine-Derived Streptomyces sp. B9173.

Shen X(1), Wang X(1), Huang T(1), Deng Z(1), Lin S(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, and Joint International Research
Laboratory on Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, and School of Life Sciences &
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University; 800 Dongchuan Rd, Shanghai 200240, 
China.

Naphthoquinone-based meroterpenoids are hybrid polyketide-terpenoid natural
products with chemical diversity and a broad range of biological activities.
Here, we report the isolation of a group of naphthoquinone-containing compounds
from Streptomyces sp. B9173, and their structures were elucidated by using a
combination of spectroscopic techniques, including 1D, 2D NMR, and
high-resolution mass (HRMS) analysis. Seven flaviogeranin congeners or
intermediates, three of which were new, have been derived from common
naphthoquinone backbone and subsequent oxidation, methylation, prenylation, and
amino group incorporation. Both flaviogeranin B1 (1) and B (2) contain an amino
group which was incorporated into the C8 of 1,3,6,8-terhydroxynaphthalene (THN). 
Flaviogeranin D (3) contains an intact C-geranylgeranyl residue attached to the
C2 of THN, while the O-geranylgeranyl group of 2 links with the hydroxyl on the
C2 site of THN. Four compounds were selected and tested for antibacterial
activity and cytotoxicity, with 3 and flaviogeranin C2 (5) displaying potent
activity against selected bacteria and cancer cell lines. In light of the
structure features of isolated compounds and the biosynthetic genes, a
biosynthetic pathway of naphthoquinone-based flaviogeranins has been proposed.
These isolated compounds not only extend the structural diversity but also
represent new insights into the biosynthesis of naphthoquinone-based
meroterpenoids.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10081187 
PMCID: PMC7463872
PMID: 32824158 

