
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Aug 21;10(1):14072. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-70839-9.

Fatty acid synthase, a novel poor prognostic factor for acute lymphoblastic
leukemia which can be targeted by ginger extract.

Ghaeidamini Harouni M(1), Rahgozar S(2), Rahimi Babasheikhali S(1), Safavi A(1), 
Ghodousi ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Faculty of
Biological Science and Technology, University of Isfahan, 81746-73441, Isfahan,
Iran.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Faculty of
Biological Science and Technology, University of Isfahan, 81746-73441, Isfahan,
Iran. rahgozar@sci.ui.ac.ir.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2020 Nov 25;10(1):20952.

Altered metabolism of fatty acid synthesis is considered a hallmark
characteristic of several malignancies, including acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL). To evaluate the impact of fatty acid synthase (FASN) on drug resistant
ALL, bone marrow samples were collected from 65 pediatric ALLs, including 40 de
novo and 25 relapsed patients. 22 non-cancer individuals were chosen as controls.
Quantitative RT-PCR showed increased expression levels of FASN in drug resistant 
patients compared with the therapy responders. Single and combined treatment of
malignant cells were analyzed using Annexin-V/PI double staining and MTT assays. 
Incubation of resistant primary cells with ginger showed simultaneous increased
apoptosis rates and reduced FASN expression levels. Furthermore, docking studies 
demonstrated high affinity bindings between ginger derivatives and FASN
thioesterase and ketosynthase domains, compared with their known inhibitors,
fenofibrate and morin, respectively. Finally, combined treatment of in-house
multidrug resistant T-ALL subline with ginger and dexamethasone induced drug
sensitivity and down regulation of FASN expression, accordingly. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first study that introduces FASN upregulation as a
poor prognostic factor for drug resistant childhood ALL. Moreover, it was
revealed that FASN inhibition may be applied by ginger phytochemicals and
overcome dexamethasone resistance, subsequently.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-70839-9 
PMCID: PMC7442786
PMID: 32826925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

