
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2020 Nov;90:208-215. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.08.018. Epub 2020
Aug 19.

Invariant Natural Killer T cells resilience to paradoxical sleep
deprivation-associated stress.

Sousa MEP(1), Gonzatti MB(1), Fernandes ER(1), Freire BM(1), Guereschi MG(1),
Basso AS(1), Andersen ML(2), Rosa DS(3), Keller AC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Federal University of
São Paulo (UNIFESP/EPM), Rua Botucatu, 862, 4(th) floor. 04023-062 São Paulo,
Brazil.
(2)Department of Psychobiology, Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP/EPM),
Rua Botucatu, 862, 1(st) floor, 04023-062 São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Federal University of
São Paulo (UNIFESP/EPM), Rua Botucatu, 862, 4(th) floor. 04023-062 São Paulo,
Brazil; Institute for Investigation in Immunology (iii)-INCT, São Paulo, Brazil. 
Electronic address: dsrosa@unifesp.br.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Federal University of
São Paulo (UNIFESP/EPM), Rua Botucatu, 862, 4(th) floor. 04023-062 São Paulo,
Brazil. Electronic address: ackeller@unifesp.br.

Although several studies demonstrate that stressful situations, such as sleep
disturbances, negatively impact the innate and adaptive arms of the immune
system, their influence on invariant Natural Killer T (iNKT) cells remains
unclear. iNKT cells are CD1d-restricted innate T cells that recognize glycolipid 
antigens and rapidly produce polarizing cytokines being key players in several
immune responses, and a potential target for immunotherapy. iNKT cells differ in 
several aspects from conventional T lymphocytes, including a unique dependence on
CD1d-expressing double-positive (DP) thymocytes for intrathymic maturation. As a 
consequence of stress, DP thymocytes undergo glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis,
which might compromise iNKT developmental pathway. Therefore, we used a
paradoxical sleep deprivation (SD) model to determine the impact of sleep
disturbance on iNKT cell biology. After 72 h of SD, C57Bl/6 mice exhibited a
significant increase in systemic glucocorticoid levels and thymus atrophy.
Despite marked decrease in the number of DP thymocytes, the ratio CD1d+/CD1d- was
higher in SD mice, and the number of thymic iNKT cells remained unaltered,
suggesting that SD did not compromise the iNKT developmental pathway. In
contrast, SD reduced hepatic IFN-γ, but not, IL-4-producing iNKT cells, without
further effect in the spleen. Despite this fact, SD did not affect stimulation of
IFN-γ production by iNKT cells, or cytokine release, in response to
α-galactosylceramide, a specific antigen. Furthermore, although SD impaired
splenic NK cells activity against tumor cells, it did not affect iNKT
cell-specific cytotoxicity. Thus, our study shows that SD-induced stress did not 
impair the iNKT cells' responses to a cognate antigen.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.08.018 
PMID: 32827702 

