
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Sep 8;117(36):22452-22461. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2012288117. Epub 2020 Aug 20.

Phosphoglycolate salvage in a chemolithoautotroph using the Calvin cycle.

Claassens NJ(1), Scarinci G(1), Fischer A(1), Flamholz AI(2), Newell W(1),
Frielingsdorf S(3), Lenz O(3), Bar-Even A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Systems and Synthetic Metabolism Lab, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant 
Physiology, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720.
(3)Institut für Chemie, Physikalische Chemie, Technische Universität Berlin,
10623 Berlin, Germany.
(4)Systems and Synthetic Metabolism Lab, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant 
Physiology, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany; Bar-Even@mpimp-golm.mpg.de.

Carbon fixation via the Calvin cycle is constrained by the side activity of
Rubisco with dioxygen, generating 2-phosphoglycolate. The metabolic recycling of 
phosphoglycolate was extensively studied in photoautotrophic organisms, including
plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, where it is referred to as photorespiration.
While receiving little attention so far, aerobic chemolithoautotrophic bacteria
that operate the Calvin cycle independent of light must also recycle
phosphoglycolate. As the term photorespiration is inappropriate for describing
phosphoglycolate recycling in these nonphotosynthetic autotrophs, we suggest the 
more general term "phosphoglycolate salvage." Here, we study phosphoglycolate
salvage in the model chemolithoautotroph Cupriavidus necator H16 (Ralstonia
eutropha H16) by characterizing the proxy process of glycolate metabolism,
performing comparative transcriptomics of autotrophic growth under low and high
CO2 concentrations, and testing autotrophic growth phenotypes of gene deletion
strains at ambient CO2 We find that the canonical plant-like C2 cycle does not
operate in this bacterium, and instead, the bacterial-like glycerate pathway is
the main route for phosphoglycolate salvage. Upon disruption of the glycerate
pathway, we find that an oxidative pathway, which we term the malate cycle,
supports phosphoglycolate salvage. In this cycle, glyoxylate is condensed with
acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) to give malate, which undergoes two oxidative
decarboxylation steps to regenerate acetyl-CoA. When both pathways are disrupted,
autotrophic growth is abolished at ambient CO2 We present bioinformatic data
suggesting that the malate cycle may support phosphoglycolate salvage in diverse 
chemolithoautotrophic bacteria. This study thus demonstrates a so far unknown
phosphoglycolate salvage pathway, highlighting important diversity in microbial
carbon fixation metabolism.

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2012288117 
PMCID: PMC7486775
PMID: 32820073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

