
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Nov;85:104509. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104509. Epub
2020 Aug 21.

The effect of Staphylococcus aureus on the antibiotic resistance and
pathogenicity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa based on crc gene as a metabolism
regulator: An in vitro wound model study.

Dehbashi S(1), Pourmand MR(2), Alikhani MY(3), Asl SS(4), Arabestani MR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical
Sciences, Hamadan, Iran,. Electronic address: s.dehbashi@umsha.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: mpourmand@tums.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical
Sciences, Hamadan, Iran,. Electronic address: alikhani@umsha.ac.ir.
(4)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical
Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. Electronic address: s.soleimaniasl@umsha.ac.ir.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical
Sciences, Hamadan, Iran,. Electronic address: mohammad.arabestani@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The cooperation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus
in various infections results in increased pathogenicity and antibiotic
resistance. However, the mechanism controlling such a phenomenon is still
unclear. In this study, the effects of S. aureus on the metabolism, antibiotic
resistance, and pathogenicity of P. aeruginosa were investigated.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The biofilm and the planktonic states of growth of P.
aeruginosa and S. aureus were investigated using the co-culture method in the
L929 cell line. Then, the antibiotic resistance and virulence factors production 
of the recovered colonies of P. aeruginosa were examined by phenotypic methods.
Quantitative Real-Time PCR was used to determine the expression level of crc,
lasI/R, and rhlI/R genes. Two way ANOVA test and student's t-test were used to
analyze the effect of S.aureus on metabolism, virulence, and resistance of
P.aeruginosa.
RESULTS: P. aeruginosa strains in a single-species planktonic culture on the L929
cell line indicated higher CFU counts than the biofilm. Conversely, in the
biofilm state of co-culture, the CFU counts increased in comparison to the
planktonic condition. Also, the expression level of crc increased two fold in the
PA-1 and PA-2 strains compared to the single-species cultures on the L929 cell
line. However, the PA-3 strain indicated a sharp decrease in the expression of
crc (3 fold decrease). Besides, a 3-4 fold increase in susceptibility to amikacin
was observed as the expression level of crc declined. The QS-regulated factors
were diminished as rhlR and lasI were downregulated in both states of growth.
CONCLUSION: In polymicrobial wound infection, Staphylococcus aureus plays a vital
role in the metabolic changes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. However, the levels of
antibiotic susceptibility and pathogenicity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa also
changed due to metabolism.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104509 
PMID: 32835876 

