
1. J Periodontol. 2020 Aug 26. doi: 10.1002/JPER.20-0074. [Epub ahead of print]

Local promotion of B cells (B10) function alleviates experimental periodontitis
bone loss through antagonizing Receptor Activator of NF-KappaB Ligand-expressing 
neutrophils.

Cao G(1)(2), Zhang X(1), Song Y(1), Sun Y(1), Ling H(3), Han X(4), Lin J(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of stomatology, The Fourth Hospital of Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, China.
(2)Department of stomatology, The First People hospital of Jingzhou, Jingzhou,
China.
(3)Department of Immunology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, The Forsyth Institute,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of stomatology, Beijing Tongren hospital of Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Persistent host immune responses initiated by oral bacteria protect
host against infection but may also elicit the process of sustained periodontal
inflammation and subsequent alveolar bone loss. Interleukin-10 (IL-10), an
anti-inflammatory cytokine, can downregulate pro-inflammatory cytokine and
inhibit neutrophil migration in inflammation. IL-10-expressing regulatory B cells
(B10) is termed by negatively regulating immune response through IL-10 and are
mainly restricted in CD19+ CD1dhi CD5+ B cells in mice. Our current study was
aimed to explore the effect of locally transferred CD19+ CD1dhi CD5+ B cells on
inflammation and alveolar bone loss in an experimental periodontitis mouse model.
METHODS: Ligation plus P. gingivalis (Pg) infection was used to induce
periodontitis in a mouse model. CD19+ CD1dhi CD5+ B cells were sorted by flow
cytometry and transferred into the gingivae immediately on the fifth day after
ligation. All the mice were sacrificed on day 14 after ligation.
RESULTS: H&E staining showed that inflammatory cell infiltration was
significantly reduced by the CD19+ CD1dhi CD5+ B cells. Toluidine blue staining
showed that the CD19+ CD1dhi CD5+ B cells alleviated alveolar bone loss in the
ligature/Pg-induced periodontitis in mice. Immunohistochemical staining showed
Receptor Activator of NF-KappaB Ligand (RANKL), Interleukin-1β(IL-1β) and
Interleukin-17 (IL-17) were decreased after the CD19+ CD1dhi CD5+ B cell
transfer. Immunofluorescent staining showed that IL-10 was increased while the
number of Ly6G+ neutrophil and its RANKL production were decreased in gingival
tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicated that locally transferred CD19+ CD1dhi CD5+ B
cells may alleviate alveolar bone loss through inhibiting pro-inflammatory
cytokine expression and RANKL-expressing neutrophils in the periodontitis mouse
model.

© 2020 American Academy of Periodontology.

DOI: 10.1002/JPER.20-0074 
PMID: 32845513 

