
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Aug 22;8(9). pii: E1286. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8091286.

Influences of Semaphorin 3A Expression on Clinicopathological Features, Human
Papillomavirus Status, and Prognosis in Oropharyngeal Carcinoma.

Pham HT(1), Kondo S(1), Endo K(1), Wakisaka N(1), Aoki Y(1), Nakanishi Y(1), Kase
K(1), Mizokami H(1), Kano M(1), Ueno T(1), Hatano M(1), Moriyama-Kita M(1),
Sugimoto H(1), Yoshizaki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is now identified as a major etiologic
factor for oropharyngeal cancer (OPC), and HPV positivity is well established
better prognostic marker in OPC. Now, predictable markers for the prognosis of
the patients who are stratified by HPV has been investigated in. Semaphorin 3A
(SEMA3A) is a well-known axon guidance molecule in the nervous system. It is also
known as a tumor suppressor in various cancers. In the present study, we examined
the relationships between SEMA3A and clinicopathologic features, especially HPV
status, and neoangiogenesis, and its prognostic significance for OPC patients.
Thirty-two OPC patients and 17 normal patients were analyzed for SEMA3A
expression by immunohistochemical analysis. We also analyzed 22 OPC specimens for
CD34 expression as a marker of neoangiogenesis. SEMA3A was significantly
downregulated in OPC compared with chronic tonsillitis tissues (p = 0.005).
SEMA3A expression was negatively correlated with CD34 expression (r = -0.466, p =
0.033). Moreover, the higher SEMA3A expression cohort showed better survival than
the lower SEMA3A expression cohort regardless of HPV status (p = 0.035). These
results suggest that SEMA3A expression is a prognostic marker for survival
regardless of HPV status and is associated with anti-angiogenesis in OPC.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8091286 
PMCID: PMC7565979
PMID: 32842711 

