
1. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2021 Jan;85(1):e13330. doi: 10.1111/aji.13330. Epub 2020 Sep
14.

Inappropriate activation of invariant natural killer T cells and
antigen-presenting cells with the elevation of HMGB1 in preterm births without
acute chorioamnionitis.

Kato M(1)(2), Negishi Y(1)(3), Shima Y(4), Kuwabara Y(1), Morita R(3), Takeshita 
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nippon Medical School Musashikosugi
Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and immunology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo,
Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Nippon Medical School Musashikosugi Hospital,
Kanagawa, Japan.

PROBLEM: Acute chorioamnionitis (aCAM) associated with microbial infection is a
primary cause of preterm birth (PB). However, recent studies have demonstrated
that innate immunity and sterile inflammation are causes of PB in the absence of 
aCAM. Therefore, we analyzed immune cells in the decidua of early to moderate PB 
without aCAM.
METHOD OF STUDY: Deciduas were obtained from patients with PB at a gestational
age of 24+0 to 33+6  weeks without aCAM in pathological diagnosis. The patients
were divided into two groups as follows: patients with labor and/or rupture of
membrane (ROM) (no aCAM with labor and/or ROM: nCAM-w-LR), and patients without
labor and/or ROM (no aCAM without labor and/or ROM: nCAM-w/o-LR). The immune
cells and high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) levels in the decidua were analyzed
using flow cytometry. Co-culture of CD56+ cells with dendritic cells (DCs) and
macrophages obtained from the decidua was also performed in the presence of
HMGB1.
RESULTS: The nCAM-w-LR group demonstrated an accumulation of iNKT cells, and
increased expression of HMGB1, TLR4, receptors for advanced glycation end
products, and CD1d on DCs and macrophages. HMGB1 facilitated the proliferation of
iNKT cells co-cultured with DCs and macrophages, which was found to be inhibited 
by heparin.
CONCLUSIONS: Inappropriate activation of innate immune cells and increased HMGB1 
expression may represent parturition signs in human pregnancy. Therefore, control
of these cells and HMGB1 antigenicity may be represent a potential therapeutic
target for the prevention of PB.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/aji.13330 
PMID: 32852122 

