
1. Biochemistry. 2020 Sep 29;59(38):3626-3638. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00605.
Epub 2020 Sep 11.

Activity Mapping the Acyl Carrier Protein: Elongating Ketosynthase Interaction in
Fatty Acid Biosynthesis.

Mindrebo JT(1)(2), Misson LE(1), Johnson C(1), Noel JP(2), Burkart MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego,
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0358, United States.
(2)Jack H. Skirball Center for Chemical Biology and Proteomics, The Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla,
California 92037, United States.

Elongating ketosynthases (KSs) catalyze carbon-carbon bond-forming reactions
during the committed step for each round of chain extension in both fatty acid
synthases (FASs) and polyketide synthases (PKSs). A small Î±-helical acyl carrier 
protein (ACP) shuttles fatty acyl intermediates between enzyme active sites. To
accomplish this task, the ACP relies on a series of dynamic interactions with
multiple partner enzymes of FAS and associated FAS-dependent pathways. Recent
structures of the Escherichia coli FAS ACP, AcpP, in covalent complexes with its 
two cognate elongating KSs, FabF and FabB, provide high-resolution details of
these interfaces, but a systematic analysis of specific interfacial interactions 
responsible for stabilizing these complexes has not yet been undertaken. Here, we
use site-directed mutagenesis with both in vitro and in vivo activity analyses to
quantitatively evaluate these contacting surfaces between AcpP and FabF. We
delineate the FabF interface into three interacting regions and demonstrate the
effects of point mutants, double mutants, and region deletion variants. Results
from these analyses reveal a robust and modular FabF interface capable of
tolerating seemingly critical interface mutations with only the deletion of an
entire region significantly compromising activity. Structure and sequence
analyses of FabF orthologs from related type II FAS pathways indicate significant
conservation of type II FAS KS interface residues and, overall, support its
delineation into interaction regions. These findings strengthen our mechanistic
understanding of molecular recognition events between ACPs and FAS enzymes and
provide a blueprint for engineering ACP-dependent biosynthetic pathways.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00605 
PMID: 32857494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

