
1. J Mol Biol. 2020 Sep 18;432(20):5711-5734. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.08.021. Epub
2020 Aug 28.

Conformational Trapping of a β-Glucosides-Binding Protein Unveils the Selective
Two-Step Ligand-Binding Mechanism of ABC Importers.

Chandravanshi M(1), Samanta R(1), Kanaujia SP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, Assam, India.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, Assam, India. Electronic address:
spkanaujia@iitg.ac.in.

Substrate-binding proteins (SBPs), selectively capture ligand(s) and ensure their
translocation via its cognate ATP-binding cassette (ABC) import system. SBPs bind
their cognate ligand(s) via an induced-fit mechanism known as the "Venus
Fly-trap"; however, this mechanism lacks the atomic details of all conformational
landscape as the confirmatory evidence(s) in its support. In this study, we
delineate the atomic details of an SBP, β-glucosides-binding protein (βGlyBP)
from Thermus thermophilus HB8. The protein βGlyBP is multi-specific and binds to 
different types of β-glucosides varying in their glycosidic linkages viz. β-1,2; 
β-1,3; β-1,4 and β-1,6 with a degree of polymerization of 2-5 glucosyl units.
Structurally, the protein βGlyBP possesses four subdomains (N1, N2, C1 and C2).
The unliganded protein βGlyBP remains in an open state, which closes upon binding
to sophorose (SOP2), laminari-oligosaccharides (LAMn), cello-oligosaccharides
(CELn), and gentiobiose (GEN2). This study reports, for the first time, four
different structural states (open-unliganded, partial-open-unliganded,
open-liganded and closed-liganded) of the protein βGlyBP, revealing its
conformational changes upon ligand binding and suggesting a two-step induced-fit 
mechanism. Further, results suggest that the conformational changes of N1 and C1 
subdomains drive the ligand binding, unlike that of the whole N- and C-terminal
domains (NTD and CTD) as known in the "Venus Fly-trap" mechanism. Additionally,
profiling of stereo-selection mechanism for α- and β-glucosides reveals that in
the ligand-binding site four secondary structural elements (L1, H1, H2 and H3)
drive the ligand selection. In summary, results demonstrate that the details of
conformational changes and ligand selection are pre-encoded in the SBPs.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.08.021 
PMID: 32866452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

