
1. Anaerobe. 2020 Oct;65:102265. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102265. Epub 2020 Aug 
26.

Clostridium perfringens α-toxin inhibits myogenic differentiation of C2C12
myoblasts.

Takehara M(1), Kobayashi K(2), Nagahama M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima
Bunri University, Yamashiro-cho, Tokushima, 770-8514, Japan. Electronic address: 
mtakehara@ph.bunri-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima
Bunri University, Yamashiro-cho, Tokushima, 770-8514, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima
Bunri University, Yamashiro-cho, Tokushima, 770-8514, Japan. Electronic address: 
nagahama@ph.bunri-u.ac.jp.

Clostridium perfringens type A is the causative agent of clostridial myonecrosis,
and α-toxin has been reported to be responsible for the pathogenesis. Recently,
it was reported that regeneration of skeletal muscle after C. perfringens-induced
muscle disorders is delayed, but the detailed mechanisms have not been
elucidated. Here, we tested whether α-toxin impairs the differentiation of C2C12 
myoblasts, a useful cell line to study muscle growth, maturation, and
regeneration in vitro. α-Toxin dose-dependently inhibited myotube formation in
C2C12 cultures after induction of their differentiation by horse serum. Also,
immunoblot analysis revealed that α-toxin dose-dependently decreases the
expressions of two skeletal muscle differentiation markers, myogenic
differentiation 1 (MyoD) and myogenin. These results demonstrate that α-toxin
impairs the myogenic differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts. To reveal the mechanism 
behind α-toxin-mediated impairment of myogenic differentiation, we focused on
ceramide production since α-toxin is known to promote the formation of ceramide
by its sphingomyelinase activity. Immunofluorescent analysis revealed that
ceramide production is accelerated by treatment with α-toxin. Furthermore, a
synthetic cell-permeable ceramide analog, C2-ceramide, inhibited myotube
formation in C2C12 cells and decreased the expressions of MyoD and myogenin,
suggesting that accelerated ceramide production is involved in the
α-toxin-mediated blockage of myogenic differentiation. Together, our results
illustrate that the impairment of myogenic differentiation by α-toxin might be
crucial for the pathogenesis of C. perfringens to delay regeneration of severely 
damaged skeletal muscles.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102265 
PMID: 32860931 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

