
1. Cell Mol Immunol. 2021 Mar;18(3):644-659. doi: 10.1038/s41423-020-00527-1. Epub
2020 Aug 31.

Exploring the stage-specific roles of Tcf-1 in T cell development and malignancy 
at single-cell resolution.

Wang F(#)(1), Qi Z(#)(1), Yao Y(1), Yu G(1), Feng T(1), Zhao T(1), Xue HH(2),
Zhao Y(1), Jiang P(3), Bao L(4), Yu S(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Yuanmingyuan West Road 2, 100193, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.
(3)Regenerative Biology Laboratory, Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison,
WI, 53707, USA.
(4)Department Hematology, Beijing Jishuitan Hospital, 100096, Beijing, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Yuanmingyuan West Road 2, 100193, Beijing, China. 
ysy@cau.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Tcf-1 (encoded by Tcf7) not only plays critical roles in promoting T cell
development and differentiation but also has been identified as a tumor
suppressor involved in preventing T cell malignancy. However, the comprehensive
mechanisms of Tcf-1 involved in T cell transformation remain poorly understood.
In this study, Tcf7fl/fl mice were crossed with Vav-cre, Lck-cre, or Cd4-cre mice
to delete Tcf-1 conditionally at the beginning of the HSC, DN2-DN3, or DP stage, 
respectively. The defective T cell development phenotypes became gradually less
severe as the deletion stage became more advanced in distinct mouse models.
Interestingly, consistent with Tcf7-/- mice, Tcf7fl/flVav-cre mice developed
aggressive T cell lymphoma within 45 weeks, but no tumors were generated in
Tcf7fl/flLck-cre or Tcf7fl/flCd4-cre mice. Single-cell RNA-seq (ScRNA-seq)
indicated that ablation of Tcf-1 at distinct phases can subdivide DN1 cells into 
three clusters (C1, C2, and C3) and DN2-DN3 cells into three clusters (C4, C5,
and C6). Moreover, Tcf-1 deficiency redirects bifurcation among divergent cell
fates, and clusters C1 and C4 exhibit high potential for leukemic transformation.
Mechanistically, we found that Tcf-1 directly binds and mediates chromatin
accessibility for both typical T cell regulators and proto-oncogenes, including
Myb, Mycn, Runx1, and Lyl1 in the DN1 phase and Lef1, Id2, Dtx1, Fyn, Bcl11b, and
Zfp36l2 in the DN2-DN3 phase. The aberrant expression of these genes due to Tcf-1
deficiency in very early T cells contributes to subsequent tumorigenesis. Thus,
we demonstrated that Tcf-1 plays stage-specific roles in regulating early
thymocyte development and transformation, providing new insights and evidence for
clinical trials on T-ALL leukemia.

DOI: 10.1038/s41423-020-00527-1 
PMID: 32868912 

