
1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2020 Sep;27(9):2299-2307. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2020.04.002. Epub
2020 Apr 13.

In-silico elucidation of Moringa oleifera phytochemicals against diabetes
mellitus.

Zainab B(1)(2), Ayaz Z(1)(2), Alwahibi MS(3), Khan S(2), Rizwana H(3), Soliman
DW(3), Alawaad A(3), Mehmood Abbasi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, COMSATS University Islamabad, Abbottabad
Campus 22060, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics, Govt. Post Graduate College Mandian Abbottabad, 
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Botany and Microbiology, College of Science, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Moringa oleifera is also known as "Miracle tree", due to its multiple uses and
adaptability. Because of nutritive and pharmacological values, it is widely
cultivated across the world. M. oleifera leaves are rich source of minerals,
vitamins and many health beneficial secondary metabolites, and possess
significant anti-diabetic potential. Consequently, Insilco study could be
noteworthy to expand effective anti-diabetic drugs from this plant. Present study
was designed to find out the best bioactive compounds of M. oleifera as a
potential therapeutic agent against diabetes mellitus through In-silico method.
For this, structures of phytochemicals were extracted from PubChem and docked to 
mutated protein from PBD. Afterwards, datasets were prepared for ligand based
pharmacophore and their pharmacophoric features were generated from LigandScout. 
Finally five phytochemicals viz. anthraquinone, 2-phenylchromenylium
(Anthocyanins), hemlock tannin, sitogluside (glycoside) and A-phenolic steroid
were selected, which exhibited effective binding within the active binding pocket
of the targeted protein. Ligand based pharmacophore model showed the key features
i.e. HBD, HBA, aromatic ring, hydrophobic, positively ionizable surface essential
for receptor binding. Our findings suggest that screened phytochemicals present
in M. oleifera can be used as potential therapeutic drug candidates to treat
diabetes mellitus.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2020.04.002 
PMCID: PMC7451590
PMID: 32884411 

