
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Sep 2;17(17). pii: E6392. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17176392.

Effects of the Ionic and Nanoparticle Forms of Cu and Ag on These Metals'
Bioaccumulation in the Eggs and Fry of Rainbow Trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss W.).

Kowalska-Góralska M(1), Senze M(1), Łuczyńska J(2), Czyż K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding, Faculty of Biology and Animal Sciences, Wroclaw 
University of Environmental and Life Sciences, 51-630 Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Food Sciences, University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, 10-726
Olsztyn, Poland.

Nanotechnology is a rapidly growing field of science, and an increasing number of
nanoproducts, including nanometals, can be found on the market. Various
nanometals and the products that are manufactured based on them can help to fight
bacteria and fungi, but they can also penetrate organisms and accumulate in them.
This study aimed to compare the effects of two metals, silver (Ag) and copper
(Cu), with known antibacterial and fungicidal properties in their ionic (AgNO3,
CuSO4·5H2O) and nanoparticle (AgNPs, CuNPs) forms on rainbow trout eggs and fry. 
Concentrations of metals ranging from 0 to 16 mg/L were used during egg swelling 
for 2 h. The swelling of eggs in Cu solutions resulted in an increase in Cu
content in the eggs (just like in the case of Ag); however, the changes in fry
were not significant in the case of both Ag and Cu. The concentrations of these
metals in eggs was greatly affected by the applied form of Ag and Cu. Because
CuNPs penetrated the embryo in fish eggs at lower concentrations compared to
AgNPs, it would be worth considering them for antibacterial applications during
egg incubation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17176392 
PMCID: PMC7504287
PMID: 32887354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

