
1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2020 Sep 2;9(9). pii: E567. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics9090567.

Synergy of the Bacteriocin AS-48 and Antibiotics against Uropathogenic
Enterococci.

Montalbán-López M(1), Cebrián R(1), Galera R(1), Mingorance L(1), Martín-Platero 
AM(1), Valdivia E(1), Martínez-Bueno M(1), Maqueda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Granada, c.
Fuentenueva s/n, 18071 Granada, Spain.

The genus Enterococcus comprises a ubiquitous group of Gram-positive bacteria
that can cause diverse health care-associated infections. Their genome plasticity
enables easy acquisition of virulence factors as well as antibiotic resistances. 
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) and catheter-associated UTIs are common diseases 
caused by enterococci. In this study, Enterococcus strains isolated from UTIs
were characterized, showing that the majority were E. faecalis and contained
several virulence factors associated to a better colonization of the urinary
tract. Their susceptibility against the bacteriocin AS-48 and several antibiotics
was tested. AS-48 is a potent circular bacteriocin that causes bacterial death by
pore formation in the cell membrane. The interest of this bacteriocin is based on
the potent inhibitory activity, the high stability against environmental
conditions, and the low toxicity. AS-48 was active at concentrations below 10
mg/L even against antibiotic-resistant strains, whereas these strains showed
resistance to, at least, seven of the 20 antibiotics tested. Moreover, the effect
of AS-48 combined with antibiotics commonly used to treat UTIs was largely
synergistic (with up to 100-fold MIC reduction) and only occasionally additive.
These data suggest AS-48 as a potential novel drug to deal with or prevent
enterococcal infections.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics9090567 
PMCID: PMC7558097
PMID: 32887311 

