
1. Nutrients. 2020 Sep 5;12(9). pii: E2716. doi: 10.3390/nu12092716.

Moderate Wine Consumption Reduces Faecal Water Cytotoxicity in Healthy
Volunteers.

Zorraquín-Peña I(1), González de Llano D(1), Tamargo A(1), Moreno-Arribas MV(1), 
Bartolomé B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Science Research (CIAL), CSIC-UAM Nicolás Cabrera, 9. Campus
de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

There are some studies that suggest that moderate consumption of wine, as part of
a healthy and balanced diet, has a favourable effect on intestinal health. This
study evaluates the effect of moderate wine consumption on faecal water (FW)
cytotoxicity as a parameter of gut health. To that end, faecal samples before and
after a red wine intervention study (250 mL of wine/day, 4 weeks) in healthy
volunteers (n = 8) and in a parallel control group (n = 3) were collected and
assayed for in vitro FW cytotoxicity. Two reference compounds, phenol and
p-cresol, were used for assessing the cytotoxicity assays using two colon
epithelial cell lines (HT-29 and HCT 116) and different assay conditions (FW
dilution and incubation time). For the two cell lines and all assay conditions,
the means of percentage cell viability were higher (lower cytotoxicity) for
samples collected after the red wine intervention than for those collected
before, although significant (p < 0.05) differences were only found in certain
assay conditions for both cell lines. Significant positive correlations between
the percentage cell viability and the contents of some faecal metabolites
(short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) and phenolic acids (PA)) were found for the more 
resistant cell line (HCT 116), suggesting that the reduction in FW cytotoxicity
observed after moderate red wine consumption was related to the production of
microbial-derived metabolites such as SCFA and PA, whose faecal contents have
been shown to increase after wine consumption. FW cytotoxicity can be deemed as a
holistic biomarker that involves diet, gut microbiota and host.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12092716 
PMCID: PMC7551400
PMID: 32899492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

