
1. Biomolecules. 2020 Sep 7;10(9). pii: E1290. doi: 10.3390/biom10091290.

Loss of ADAM9 Leads to Modifications of the Extracellular Matrix Modulating Tumor
Growth.

Abety AN(1), Pach E(1), Giebeler N(1), Fromme JE(1), Aramadhaka LR(2), Mauch
C(1), Fox JW(2), Zigrino P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908-734, USA.

ADAM9 is a metalloproteinase strongly expressed at the tumor-stroma border by
both tumor and stromal cells. We previously showed that the host deletion of
ADAM9 leads to enhanced growth of grafted B16F1 melanoma cells by a mechanism
mediated by TIMP1 and the TNF-Î±/sTNFR1 pathway. This study aimed to dissect the
structural modifications in the tumor microenvironment due to the stromal
expression of ADAM9 during melanoma progression. We performed proteomic analysis 
of peritumoral areas of ADAM9 deleted mice and identified the altered expression 
of several matrix proteins. These include decorin, collagen type XIV,
fibronectin, and collagen type I. Analysis of these matrices in the matrix
producing cells of the dermis, fibroblasts, showed that ADAM9-/- and wild type
fibroblasts synthesize and secreted almost comparable amounts of decorin.
Conversely, collagen type I expression was moderately, but not significantly,
decreased at the transcriptional level, and the protein increased in ADAM9-/-
fibroblast mono- and co-cultures with melanoma media. We show here for the first 
time that ADAM9 can release a collagen fragment. Still, it is not able to degrade
collagen type I. However, the deletion of ADAM9 in fibroblasts resulted in
reduced MMP-13 and -14 expression that may account for the reduced processing of 
collagen type I. Altogether, the data show that the ablation of ADAM9 in the host
leads to the altered expression of peritumoral extracellular matrix proteins that
generate a more favorable environment for melanoma cell growth. These data
underscore the suppressive role of stromal expression of ADAM9 in tumor growth
and call for a better understanding of how protease activities function in a
cellular context for improved targeting.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10091290 
PMCID: PMC7564588
PMID: 32906814 

