
1. Mol Immunol. 2020 Nov;127:31-37. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2020.08.010. Epub 2020 Sep
7.

Molecular mechanisms of FasL-mediated 'reverse-signaling'.

Malarkannan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Immunotherapy, Blood Research
Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States; Department of 
Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States;
Department of Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United
States; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, WI, United States. Electronic address: subra.malar@bcw.edu.

Effector lymphocytes, including NK and T cells, express FasL. Expression of Fas, 
the receptor for FasL in tumor cells, renders them susceptible to NK and T
cell-mediated killing. The functional relevance of FasL in initiating death
signals in tumor cells is well-characterized. However, the cytoplasmic
interacting partners and the potential signaling pathways downstream of FasL are 
far from fully defined. FasL possesses an 81 amino acid long cytoplasmic tail
with multiple unique recruitment motifs. We predict multiple interdependent
signaling complexes form the core of the 'reverse signaling' downstream of FasL. 
A direct interaction between the proline-rich domain of FasL and the SH3 domain
of PI(3)K-p85α initiates the first pathway. This cascade helps FasL to link to
PLC-γ2 via PIP3 or the Akt-dependent activation of mTOR complexes. Independently,
a GRB2/GADs-binding PXXP cytoplasmic motif of FasL can initiate a
Ras-GTP-dependent PAK1→C-Raf→MEK1/2→ERK1/2 activation. FasL can recruit Fyn via
the proline-rich domain leading to the recruitment of ADAP. Through its ability
to directly interact with Carma1 and TAK1, ADAP initiates the formation of the
Carma1/Bcl10/Malt1-based CBM signalosome that is primarily responsible for
inflammatory cytokine production. Here, we explore the conserved cytoplasmic
domains of FasL, the potential signaling molecules that interact, and the
functional downstream consequences within the effector lymphocytes to define the 
FasL-mediated 'reverse signaling'.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2020.08.010 
PMCID: PMC7606657 [Available on 2021-11-01]
PMID: 32905906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

