
1. Mar Pollut Bull. 2020 Nov;160:111603. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2020.111603. Epub 
2020 Sep 9.

Dehalogenase-producing halophiles and their potential role in bioremediation.

Oyewusi HA(1), Wahab RA(2), Huyop F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Faculty of Science, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 
81310 UTM Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia; Enzyme Technology and Green Synthesis
Group, Faculty of Science, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 UTM Johor Bahru, 
Johor, Malaysia; Department of Biochemistry, School of Science and Computer
Studies, Federal Polytechnic Ado Ekiti, PMB, 5351, Ekiti State, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia,
81310 UTM Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia; Enzyme Technology and Green Synthesis
Group, Faculty of Science, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 UTM Johor Bahru, 
Johor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Biosciences, Faculty of Science, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 
81310 UTM Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia; Enzyme Technology and Green Synthesis
Group, Faculty of Science, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 UTM Johor Bahru, 
Johor, Malaysia. Electronic address: fahrul@utm.my.

This review aims to briefly describe the potential role of dehalogenase-producing
halophilic bacteria in decontamination of organohalide pollutants. Hypersaline
habitats pose challenges to life because of low water activity (water content)
and is considered as the largest and ultimate sink for pollutants due to
naturally and anthropogenic activities in which a substantial amount of
ecological contaminants are organohalides. Several such environments appear to
host and support substantial diversity of extremely halophilic and halotolerant
bacteria as well as halophilic archaea. Biodegradation of several toxic inorganic
and organic compounds in both aerobic and anaerobic conditions are carried out by
halophilic microbes. Therefore, remediation of polluted marine/hypersaline
environments are the main scorching issues in the field of biotechnology.
Although many microbial species are reported as effective pollutants degrader,
but little has been isolated from marine/hypersaline environments. Therefore,
more novel microbial species with dehalogenase-producing ability are still
desired.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2020.111603 
PMID: 32919122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

