
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2021 Jan;28(3):3719-3736. doi:
10.1007/s11356-020-10697-0. Epub 2020 Sep 14.

Limno-ecological assessment of lentic ecosystems in the western Mediterranean
basin (Turkey) using phytoplankton indices.

Çelekli A(1), Lekesiz Ö(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Arts and Science, Gaziantep University,
27310, Gaziantep, Turkey. celekli.a@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Arts and Science, Gaziantep University,
27310, Gaziantep, Turkey.

Great attention has been given to freshwater ecosystems worldwide due to the
increased exploitation of water resources and the degradation of water quality.
This study was aimed to demonstrate the phytoplankton-stressor interactions using
multivariate approaches and assess the ecological conditions of 28 sampling
stations of 12 lentic ecosystems (five lakes and seven reservoirs) in the western
Mediterranean basin using phytoplankton indices in dry and rainy seasons 2018.
Freshwater and brackish water systems were separately ordinated by canonical
correspondence analysis. The brackish ecosystems were under pressures of Ar
(arsenic), N-N[Formula: see text] (nitrite), Ca (calcium), EC (electrical
conductivity), Cl (chloride), B (boron), etc., whereas shallow freshwater
ecosystems were associated with total organic carbon. These factors had
significant effects on phytoplankton distribution among lentic ecosystems on the 
basin. Ecological associations of phytoplankton assemblages varied in the western
Mediterranean basin during the study. Pseudanabaena catenata and Palatinus
apiculatus, considered tolerant taxa, are associated with higher Ar, EC, and V
(vanadium) while Desmodesmus abundans and Microcystis flos-aquae are related to
total organic carbon. The modified PTI (phytoplankton trophic index) had the
highest correlation coefficient value. Scores of the PTI varied from 2.02 in
Çavdır Reservoir to 2.59 in Lake Kocagöl. Results of phytoplankton indices
indicated that two (Gölhisar and Yazır) lakes and two (Yapraklı and Çavdır)
reservoirs were classified as Good, and three lakes and five reservoirs were
classified as Moderate condition. Other predicted classifications (high, poor,
and bad) by phytoplankton metrics were not represented. The modified PTI could be
a suitable phytoplankton metric for assessing the ecological status of lentic
ecosystems in the Mediterranean system according to its highest correlation
coefficient value. Overall, the results of this limno-ecological study
demonstrated that responses of phytoplankton taxa to explanatory factors provide 
crucial ecological information about their ecology and to estimate the ecological
status of lentic ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-020-10697-0 
PMID: 32926274  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

