
1. Anal Methods. 2020 Jun 18;12(23):2985-2994. doi: 10.1039/d0ay00566e.

A real-time isothermal amplification based portable microfluidic system for
simple and reliable detection of Vibrio splendidus.

Zhong R(1), Liu S(1), Wang X(2), Zhang G(3), Gong N(1), Wang M(1), Sun Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Systems Biology, Dalian Maritime University, 1
Linghai Road, Dalian 116026, China. rtzhong@dlmu.edu.cn yqsun@dlmu.edu.cn.
(2)Dalian University, Dalian Economic & Technical Development Zone, Dalian
116622, China.
(3)Beijing Baicare Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Zhongguancun Life Science Park,
Beijing 102206, China.

The spread of infectious diseases among aquaculture species has a serious impact 
on the aquaculture industry. Simple, specific and low-cost detection methods are 
urgently needed for early diagnosis and timely treatment, particularly for
on-site identifying and tracking of pathogens. Vibrio splendidus (V. splendidus) 
is regarded as one of the main pathogenic bacteria causing skin ulcerative
syndrome in cultured sea cucumbers, leading to massive mortality and severe
economic losses. We herein present a microfluidic-based real-time fluorogenic
loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) system for simple and reliable
detection of V. splendidus. A LAMP primer set with six primers (arsB1)
specifically targeting the arsB gene of V. splendidus was successfully designed
and tested on the portable microfluidic system for the first time. Only a single 
step of sample loading using a pipette is required to fill an array of reaction
wells (with 10 or 18 wells) in a disposable chip for multiplex detection. A
dedicated plastic shell is then utilized to tightly seal the openings of the chip
by buckling to prevent contamination and evaporation. Up to four chips (one
sample per chip) can be held in the stand-alone and inexpensive microdevice
simultaneously, enabling on-demand detection of multiple samples in a single run.
Reproducible (relatively low intra- and inter-chip variability) and sensitive (as
few as ∼20 CFU, Colony-Forming Units, per reaction well) on-chip arsB1-LAMP assay
was demonstrated by using diluted lysate of V. splendidus. A linear standard
curve (R2 > 0.98) was attained over the template concentration range of 5 × 103
to 5 × 106 CFU mL-1. V. splendidus can be detected in samples containing
different bacteria, indicating the feasibility of the portable microfluidic LAMP 
system for parallel detection of multiple bacterial pathogens. The proposed
on-chip LAMP assay is simple to operate, reliable for amplification, flexible in 
detection and cost-effective in instrumentation and testing, holding great
potential for on-site rapid detection and routine monitoring of aquaculture
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1039/d0ay00566e 
PMID: 32930158 

