
1. Cells. 2020 Sep 17;9(9). pii: E2118. doi: 10.3390/cells9092118.

How Relevant Are Bone Marrow-Derived Mast Cells (BMMCs) as Models for Tissue Mast
Cells? A Comparative Transcriptome Analysis of BMMCs and Peritoneal Mast Cells.

Akula S(1), Paivandy A(2), Fu Z(1), Thorpe M(1), Pejler G(2)(3), Hellman L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, The Biomedical
Center, Box 596, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, The
Biomedical Center, Box 589, SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences, Box 7011, SE-75007 Uppsala, Sweden.

Bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) are often used as a model system for
studies of the role of MCs in health and disease. These cells are relatively easy
to obtain from total bone marrow cells by culturing under the influence of IL-3
or stem cell factor (SCF). After 3 to 4 weeks in culture, a nearly homogenous
cell population of toluidine blue-positive cells are often obtained. However, the
question is how relevant equivalents these cells are to normal tissue MCs. By
comparing the total transcriptome of purified peritoneal MCs with BMMCs, here we 
obtained a comparative view of these cells. We found several important
transcripts that were expressed at very high levels in peritoneal MCs, but were
almost totally absent from the BMMCs, including the major chymotryptic granule
protease Mcpt4, the neurotrophin receptor Gfra2, the substance P receptor
Mrgprb2, the metalloprotease Adamts9 and the complement factor 2 (C2). In
addition, there were a number of other molecules that were expressed at much
higher levels in peritoneal MCs than in BMMCs, including the transcription
factors Myb and Meis2, the MilR1 (Allergin), Hdc (Histidine decarboxylase), Tarm1
and the IL-3 receptor alpha chain. We also found many transcripts that were
highly expressed in BMMCs but were absent or expressed at low levels in the
peritoneal MCs. However, there were also numerous MC-related transcripts that
were expressed at similar levels in the two populations of cells, but almost
absent in peritoneal macrophages and B cells. These results reveal that the
transcriptome of BMMCs shows many similarities, but also many differences to that
of tissue MCs. BMMCs can thereby serve as suitable models in many settings
concerning the biology of MCs, but our findings also emphasize that great care
should be taken when extrapolating findings from BMMCs to the in vivo function of
tissue-resident MCs.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9092118 
PMCID: PMC7564378
PMID: 32957735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

