
1. Access Microbiol. 2020 Jan 28;2(3):acmi000094. doi: 10.1099/acmi.0.000094.
eCollection 2020.

Re-validation and update of an extended-specificity multiplex assay for detection
of Streptococcus pneumoniae capsular serotype/serogroup-specific antigen and
cell-wall polysaccharide in urine specimens.

Eletu SD(1), Sheppard CL(1), Rose S(1), Smith K(2), Andrews N(3), Lim WS(4), Litt
DJ(1), Fry NK(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Section, Public Health England - National
Infection Service, Colindale Avenue, London, NW9 5EQ, UK.
(2)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 825 NE 13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK
73104, USA.
(3)Statistics, Modelling and Economics Department, Public Health England -
National Infection Service, Colindale Avenue, London, NW9 5EQ, UK.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Nottingham, UK.
(5)Immunisation and Countermeasures Division, Public Health England - National
Infection Service, Colindale Avenue, London, NW9 5EQ, UK.

National surveillance of pneumococcal disease at the serotype level is essential 
to assess the effectiveness of vaccination programmes. We previously developed a 
highly sensitive extended-specificity multiplex immunoassay for detection of
Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype-specific antigen in urine in the absence of
isolates. The assay uses human mAbs that detect the 24 pneumococcal
serotype/groups targeted by the pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (PCVs) and
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV-23) plus some cross-reactive types and
the pneumococcal cell-wall polysaccharide. However, the previous assay had some
limitations, namely the reduced specificity of the serotype 7F, 20 and 22F
assays, for which non-specific binding in urine samples was observed. Here we
report on the further development and re-validation of a new version of the assay
(version 2.1), which offers improved sensitivity towards serotypes 7F, 18C and
19F and increased specificity for serotypes 7F, 20 and 22F by replacement of some
of the antibody clones with new clones. Using a panel of urine specimens from
patients diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia or pneumococcal disease, the
overall clinical sensitivity of this version of the assay based on isolation of
S. pneumoniae from a normally sterile site is 94.3 % and the clinical specificity
is 93.6 %, in comparison with clinical sensitivity and specificity values of
96.2 % and 89.9 % in the previous assay.

© 2020 Crown copyright.

DOI: 10.1099/acmi.0.000094 
PMCID: PMC7470314
PMID: 32974571 

Conflict of interest statement: The Public Health England National Infection
Service Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Section (VPBS) conduct contract research for
pharmaceutical industries on behalf of Public Health England. No personal
remuneration is received. The Public Health England National Infection Service
Immunisation and Countermeasures Division has provided vaccine manufacturers with
post-marketing surveillance reports, which Marketing Authorisation Holders are
required to submit to the UK Licensing authority in compliance with their Risk
Management Strategy. A cost recovery charge is made for these reports. WSL’s
institution has received unrestricted investigator-initiated research funding
from Pfizer for a multicentre cohort study in which WSL is the Chief
Investigator. WSL’s work is supported by the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR) Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre.

