
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2020 Oct 21;68(42):11735-11746. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.0c04780.
Epub 2020 Oct 7.

Highland Barley Whole Grain (Hordeum vulgare L.) Ameliorates Hyperlipidemia by
Modulating Cecal Microbiota, miRNAs, and AMPK Pathways in Leptin
Receptor-Deficient db/db Mice.

Deng N(1), He Z(1), Guo R(2), Zheng B(1)(3), Li T(4), Liu RH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Overseas Expertise Introduction Center for Discipline Innovation of Food
Nutrition and Human Health (111 Center), School of Food Science and Engineering, 
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510641, China.
(2)School of Food Science, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Zhongshan 528458,
China.
(3)Guangdong ERA Food & Life Health Research Institute, Guangzhou 510670, China.
(4)Department of Food Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, United
States.

The mechanisms of highland barley whole grain (BWG) with rich phenolics on obese 
db/db mice were investigated in this study. Oral consumption of BWG reduced food 
intake, body weight, organ/body weight indexes of liver and fat, levels of serum 
and hepatic lipids, liver injury, and oxidative stress. Furthermore, BWG
recovered the disorder of cecal microbiota by augmenting the
Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratio and Alistipes abundance and decreasing the
abundances of Bacteroides and Desulfovibrionaceae to modulate lipid
metabolism-related genes. BWG inhibited fatty acid biosynthesis via upregulating 
the phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein kinase Î±, while downregulating
sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c, fatty acid synthase (FAS), and
stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 levels. BWG also significantly downregulated miRNA-122,
miRNA-33, miRNA-34a, and miRNA-206 levels. Accordingly, BWG exhibited
hypolipidemic potential through modulating cecal microbiota, AMPK/SREBP-1c/FAS
pathway, and related miRNAs, triggering the alleviation of dyslipidemia. These
findings suggested BWG as an effective candidate to ameliorate the symptoms of
hyperlipidemia.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.0c04780 
PMID: 32985184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

