
1. J Biol Chem. 1987 Jun 25;262(18):8868-74.

The DNA sequence specificity of stimulation of DNA polymerases by factor D.

Fry M, Sharf R, Weisman-Shomer P, Evers PC, Loeb LA.

The mechanism of enhancement of DNA polymerase activity by the murine DNA-binding
protein factor D was investigated. Extension by Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I
and calf thymus DNA polymerase-alpha of 5'-32P-labeled oligodeoxynucleotide
primers that are complementary to poly(dT) or to bacteriophage M13 DNA was
measured in the absence or presence of factor D. With 5'-[32P](dA)9.poly(dT),
factor D enables E. coli polymerase I to fill approximately 15-nucleotide gaps
between adjacent primers; whereas in the absence of the stimulatory protein,
poly(dT) is not copied significantly. In order to study the nucleotide
specificity of synthesis enhancement, we used M13mp10 DNA containing 4
consecutive thymidine residues downstream from the 3-hydroxyl terminus of an
oligonucleotide primer. Upon addition of factor D, both polymerase I and
polymerase-alpha can traverse this sequence more efficiently and thus generate
longer DNA products. Densitometric analysis of nonextended and elongated
5'-32P-labeled M13 primer indicates that, without changing the frequency of
primer utilization, factor D enhances the activity of these DNA polymerases by
increasing their apparent processivity. By positioning oligonucleotide primers 4,
8, and 12 bases upstream from the (dT)4 template sequence, we show that the
enhancement of synthesis by factor D is independent of the position of the
oligothymidine cluster. We hypothesize that factor D interacts with
oligo(dT).oligo(dA) domains in DNA to alter their conformation, which may
normally obstruct the progression of DNA polymerases.


PMID: 3298245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

