
1. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2020 Sep;114:111031. doi:
10.1016/j.msec.2020.111031. Epub 2020 Apr 30.

Biocompatible fluorinated wrinkled hydrogel films with antimicrobial activity.

González-Henríquez CM(1), Rodriguez-Umanzor FE(2), Almagro-Correa J(2),
Sarabia-Vallejos MA(3), Martínez-Campos E(4), Esteban-Lucía M(4), Del
Campo-García A(5), Rodríguez-Hernández J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Ciencias Naturales, Matemáticas y del Medio Ambiente, Departamento
de Química, Universidad Tecnológica Metropolitana, P.O. Box 9845, Correo 21,
Santiago, Chile; Programa Institucional de Fomento a la Investigación, Desarrollo
e Innovación, Universidad Tecnológica Metropolitana, Ignacio Valdivieso 2409,
Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: carmen.gonzalez@utem.cl.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Naturales, Matemáticas y del Medio Ambiente, Departamento
de Química, Universidad Tecnológica Metropolitana, P.O. Box 9845, Correo 21,
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Departamento de Ingeniería Estructural y Geotecnia, Escuela de Ingeniería,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, P.O. Box 306, Correo 22, Santiago,
Chile; Instituto de Ingeniería Biológica y Medica, Escuela de Ingeniería,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, P.O. Box 306, Correo 22, Santiago,
Chile.
(4)Tissue Engineering Group, Instituto de Estudios Biofuncionales, Universidad
Complutense de Madrid, Associated Unit to the ICTP-CSIC Polymer Functionalization
Group, Paseo Juan XXIII, n° 1, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(5)Instituto de Cerámica y Vidrio (CSIC), Kelsen 5, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
(6)Polymer Functionalization Group, Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología de
Polímeros-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (ICTP-CSIC),
Departamento de Química Macromolecular Aplicada, Juan de la Cierva 3, 28006
Madrid, Spain.

Surface-modified hydrogel films were designed to control the bacterial
colonization on their surface and to promote cell proliferation through the
gradual insertion of highly hydrophobic functional monomers. These hydrogel films
were deposited via spin-coating technique, using muscovite mica as a substrate.
These samples were then exposed to different external stimuli to produce wrinkled
patterns. The relationship between the monomers which compose the hydrogel, was
varied to alter the hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance of the final composite.
Contact angle and confocal Raman spectroscopy measurements were carried out to
characterize the surface and the bulk of the hydrogel film. Cell proliferation
and antimicrobial tests were performed using premyoblastic murine cells
(C2C12-GFP) and RAW 264.7 (ATCC® TIB-71) macrophagic cell lines, and also for
bacteria strains, Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli. The results
indicate that the inclusion of the TFPMA produces an increase in cell
proliferation, together with a decrease in living bacterial colonies after 48 h, 
both for Gram-positive or Gram-negative species.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2020.111031 
PMID: 32993990 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We wish to
confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this
publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work
that could have influenced its outcome.

