
1. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2021 Apr;36(2):145-156. doi: 10.1111/omi.12317. Epub 2020 Oct
12.

Dipeptidyl-peptidases: Key enzymes producing entry forms of extracellular
proteins in asaccharolytic periodontopathic bacterium Porphyromonas gingivalis.

Nemoto TK(1), Ohara Nemoto Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Molecular Biology, Course of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

Porphyromonas gingivalis, a pathogen of chronic periodontitis, is an
asaccharolytic microorganism that solely utilizes nutritional amino acids as its 
energy source and cellular constituents. The bacterium is considered to
incorporate proteinaceous nutrients mainly as dipeptides, thus exopeptidases that
produce dipeptides from polypeptides are critical for survival and proliferation.
We present here an overview of dipeptide production by P. gingivalis mediated by 
dipeptidyl-peptidases (DPPs), e.g., DPP4, DPP5, DPP7, and DPP11, serine
exopeptidases localized in periplasm, which release dipeptides from the
N-terminus of polypeptides. Additionally, two other exopeptidases,
acylpeptidyl-oligopeptidase (AOP) and prolyl tripeptidyl-peptidase A (PTP-A),
which liberate N-terminal acylated di-/tri-peptides and tripeptides with Pro at
the third position, respectively, provide polypeptides in an acceptable form for 
DPPs. Hence, a large fraction of dipeptides is produced from nutritional
polypeptides by DPPs with differential specificities in combination with AOP and 
PTP-A. The resultant dipeptides are then incorporated across the inner membrane
mainly via a proton-dependent oligopeptide transporter (POT), a member of the
major facilitator superfamily. Recent studies also indicate that DPP4 and DPP7
directly link between periodontal and systemic diseases, such as type 2 diabetes 
mellitus and coagulation abnormality, respectively. Therefore, these
dipeptide-producing and incorporation molecules are considered to be potent
targets for prevention and treatment of periodontal and related systemic
diseases.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Molecular Oral Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/omi.12317 
PMID: 33006264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

