
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Sep 30;21(19). pii: E7224. doi: 10.3390/ijms21197224.

Fatty Acid Synthase Beta Dehydratase in the Lipid Biosynthesis Pathway Is
Required for Conidiogenesis, Pigmentation and Appressorium Formation in
Magnaporthe oryzae S6.

Sangappillai V(1), Nadarajah K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Faculty of Science and
Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia; UKM Bangi 43600, Malaysia.

Lipid biosynthesis produces glycerol, which is important in fueling turgor
pressure necessary for germination and penetration of plant host by fungi. As the
relationship between pathogenicity and the lipid biosynthetic pathway is not
fully understood, we have elucidated the role of the fatty acid synthase beta
subunit dehydratase (FAS1) gene in lipid biosynthesis. The FAS1 gene was silenced
through homologous double crossover in Magnaporthe oryzae strain S6 to study the 
effect on lipid biosynthesis. The vegetative growth of Δfas1 mutants show the
highest drop on oleic acid (between 10 and 50%), while the mycelial dry weight of
mutants dropped significantly on all media. Conidiation of FAS1 mutants show a
~10- and ~5-fold reduction on oatmeal and Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA),
respectively. Mutants formed mycelium that were mildly pigmented, indicating that
the deletion of FAS1 may have affected melanin biosynthesis. Biochemical and gene
expression studies concluded that the fatty acid degradation pathway might have
been interrupted by FAS1 deletion. FAS1 mutants showed no enzyme activity on
glucose or olive oil, suggesting that the mutants may lack functional peroxisomes
and be defective in β-oxidation of fatty acids, hence explaining the reduced
lipid deposits in the spores.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21197224 
PMCID: PMC7582888
PMID: 33007862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

