
1. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2021 May;130(5):504-512. doi: 10.1177/0003489420962822.
Epub 2020 Oct 1.

Long-Term Clinical Follow-Up of Patients With Chronic Rhinosinusitis.

Thunberg U(1)(2), Saber A(1)(2), Söderquist B(2)(3), Hugosson S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Örebro University Hospital, Örebro, Sweden.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Microbiology, Örebro University
Hospital, Örebro, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: This study comprised a long-term follow-up of a cohort of patients
with chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) regarding clinical features and symptomatology.
METHODS: Data from 42 patients with CRS were available from a previous study.
Forty of these patients were alive and were contacted for inclusion after
approximately 10 years. Patients completed a questionnaire about disease and
symptoms, and underwent a clinical examination.
RESULTS: Thirty-four patients (85%) responded and could be included and
evaluated. For the participants in this follow-up study median length of time
between initial inclusion (C1) and follow-up (C2) was 11 years (range: 8-15). In 
some patients the CRS shifted phenotype over time, from CRS with nasal polyposis 
to CRS without nasal polyposis or vice versa. The median total visual analogue
score for combined sinonasal symptoms for all patients was statistically
significantly reduced at follow-up. For individual patients, scores for nasal
congestion, nasal discharge, facial pressure, and hyposmia were also
statistically significantly reduced. The most frequently reported
symptom-relieving treatments were nasal steroids and saline rinsing of the nose. 
Self-reported general quality of life was statistically significantly improved at
C2 compared to C1.
CONCLUSION: At long-term follow-up, symptoms were generally reduced and patients 
reported an improved quality of life. Patients can be given hope for eventual
symptom relief. CRS is a chronic condition that seems to harbor the ability to
alter its phenotype after several years. Topical corticosteroids and saline
rinsing of the nose should be emphasized, since patients consider these
treatments to be of high value.

DOI: 10.1177/0003489420962822 
PMID: 33000628 

