
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2020 Sep 4;8:572276. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.572276.
eCollection 2020.

Consecutive Hypoxia Decreases Expression of NOTCH3, HEY1, CC10, and FOXJ1 via
NKX2-1 Downregulation and Intermittent Hypoxia-Reoxygenation Increases Expression
of BMP4, NOTCH1, MKI67, OCT4, and MUC5AC via HIF1A Upregulation in Human
Bronchial Epithelial Cells.

Yang YY(1), Lin CJ(2), Wang CC(2)(3), Chen CM(4), Kao WJ(2), Chen YH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Aerospace and Undersea Medicine, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Section of Respiratory Therapy, Rueifang Miner Hospital, New Taipei City,
Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Defense Medical
Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

Previous studies have shown that the experimental models of hypoxia-reoxygenation
(H/R) mimics the physiological conditions of ischemia-reperfusion and induce
oxidative stress and injury in various types of organs, tissues, and cells, both 
in vivo and in vitro, including human lung adenocarcinoma epithelial cells.
Nonetheless, it had not been reported whether H/R affected proliferation,
apoptosis, and expression of stem/progenitor cell markers in the bronchial
epithelial cells. In this study, we investigated differential effects of
consecutive hypoxia and intermittent 24/24-h cycles of H/R on human bronchial
epithelial (HBE) cells derived from the same-race and age-matched healthy
subjects (i.e., NHBE) and subjects with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) (i.e., DHBE). To analyze gene/protein expression during differentiation,
both the NHBE and DHBE cells at the 2nd passage were cultured at the air-liquid
interface (ALI) in the differentiation medium under normoxia for 3 days, followed
by either culturing under hypoxia (1% O2) for consecutively 9 days and then
returning to normoxia for another 9 days, or culturing under 24/24-h cycles of
H/R (i.e., 24 h of 1% O2 followed by 24 h of 21% O2, repetitively) for 18 days in
total, so that all differentiating HBE cells were exposed to hypoxia for a total 
of 9 days. In both the normal and diseased HBE cells, intermittent H/R
significantly increased HIF1A, BMP4, NOTCH1, MKI67, OCT4, and MUC5AC expression, 
while consecutive hypoxia significantly decreased NKX2-1, NOTCH3, HEY1, CC10, and
FOXJ1 expression. Inhibition of HIF1A or NKX2-1 expression by siRNA transfection 
respectively decreased BMP4/NOTCH1/MKI67/OCT4/MUC5AC and NOTCH3/HEY1/CC10/FOXJ1
expression in the HBE cells cultured under intermittent H/R to the same levels
under normoxia. Overexpression of NKX2-1 via cDNA transfection caused more than
2.8-fold increases in NOTCH3, HEY1, and FOXJ1 mRNA levels in the HBE cells
cultured under consecutive hypoxia compared to the levels under normoxia. Taken
together, our results show for the first time that consecutive hypoxia decreased 
expression of the co-regulated gene module NOTCH3/HEY1/CC10 and the
ciliogenesis-inducing transcription factor gene FOXJ1 via NKX2-1 mRNA
downregulation, while intermittent H/R increased expression of the co-regulated
gene module BMP4/NOTCH1/MKI67/OCT4 and the predominant airway mucin gene MUC5AC
via HIF1A mRNA upregulation.

Copyright Â© 2020 Yang, Lin, Wang, Chen, Kao and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2020.572276 
PMCID: PMC7500169
PMID: 33015064 

