
1. Arch Microbiol. 2021 Mar;203(2):643-654. doi: 10.1007/s00203-020-02044-1. Epub
2020 Oct 6.

Novel bacterial biofilm consortia that degrade and detoxify the carcinogenic
diazo dye Congo red.

Haque MM(1), Haque MA(2), Mosharaf MK(3), Marcus PK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Agricultural University, Gazipur, 1706, Bangladesh.
haque_bes@bsmrau.edu.bd.
(2)Department of Agro-Processing, Faculty of Agriculture, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman Agricultural University, Gazipur, 1706, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Environmental Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Agricultural University, Gazipur, 1706, Bangladesh.

Free-living planktonic single bacterial strain can decolorize Congo red (CR) but 
often produces the carcinogenic, mutagenic and genotoxic aromatic amines.
Planktonic single and bacterial consortia are more susceptible to toxic
pollutants than their biofilm counterparts. In the present study, four biofilm
consortia (C1 = Vitreoscilla sp. ENSG301, Acinetobacter lwoffii ENSG302,
Klebsiella pneumoniae ENSG303 and Pseudomonas fluorescens ENSG304,
C2 = Escherichia coli ENSD101, Enterobacter asburiae ENSD102 and E. ludwigii
ENSH201, C3 = E. asburiae ENSD102, Vitreoscilla sp. ENSG301 and Bacillus
thuringiensis ENSW401, and C4 = E. coli ENSD101, E. ludwigii ENSH201 and B.
thuringiensis ENSW401) were prepared and assessed for bioremediation of CR. All
these biofilm consortia remarkably decolorized (96.9 to 99.5%) the CR (100 mg/L) 
in static condition within 72 h incubation at 28 °C. These consortia also
synthesized significantly more intracellular azoreductase and laccase enzyme than
extracellular of these enzymes. UV-Vis spectral analysis revealed that the major 
peak at 478 nm wavelength of CR was completely disappeared. FTIR analysis showed 
several major peaks along with azo bonds are completely or partly disappeared,
deformed or widened. Chemical oxygen demand was reduced by 86.4, 85.5, 87.0 and
86.2% by C1, C2, C3 and C4, respectively. Accordingly, biodegraded metabolites of
CR by different biofilm consortia did not inhibit the germination of wheat seeds 
and bacterial growth. Thus, these biofilm consortia can be applied in
bioremediation of wastewater containing CR for safe disposal into the
environment. To our knowledge, this is the first report on degradation and
detoxification of aqueous solution containing CR by bacterial biofilm consortia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-020-02044-1 
PMID: 33021681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

