
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2021 Feb;72(2):126-132. doi: 10.1111/lam.13404. Epub 2020
Nov 10.

Antimicrobial resistance and virulence genes profiles of Arcobacter butzleri
strains isolated from back yard chickens and retail poultry meat in Chile.

Vidal-Veuthey B(1), Jara R(1), Santander K(1), Mella A(1), Ruiz S(1), Collado
L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Sciences, Universidad
Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile.
(2)Millennium Nucleus in the Biology of Intestinal Microbiota, Santiago, Chile.

This research aims to investigate the presence and pathogenic potential of
Arcobacter in poultry meat samples purchased in the retail market of Valdivia
(South of Chile) as well as in faecal samples from backyard chickens from rural
areas around this city. The isolates obtained were identified by molecular
methods. Furthermore, putative virulence genes were assessed by PCR and the
antimicrobial resistance was tested by phenotypic methods. Arcobacter was present
in 41·6% of the samples, with the highest value in retail poultry meat (55·7%)
followed by backyard production (28·0%). Arcobacter butzleri was the most
prevalent species (75·6%) followed by Arcobacter skirrowii (14·8%) and Arcobacter
cryaerophilus (9·6%). An 8·5% of A. butzleri strains from meat were resistant to 
both ciprofloxacin and tetracycline and 6·1% were resistant to erythromycin,
while none was resistant to gentamycin, unlike strains from domestic chickens,
which showed no resistance. Furthermore, A. butzleri strains from chicken meat
presented a higher prevalence of virulence genes than strains from domestic
chickens. In fact, in this last group, some genes (hecA, hecB and irgA) were
completely absent. Therefore, this study provides insight on the epidemiology of 
Arcobacter in Chilean poultry and suggests that under traditional breeding
conditions strains are, apparently, less pathogenic and drug resistant.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.13404 
PMID: 33025583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

