
1. Nutr Cancer. 2020 Oct 8:1-19. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2020.1828942. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Andrographolide Induces Apoptosis and Cell Cycle Arrest through Inhibition of
Aberrant Hedgehog Signaling Pathway in Colon Cancer Cells.

Khan I(1)(2), Mahfooz S(1)(2), Faisal M(3), Alatar AA(3), Ansari IA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Beykoz Institute of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Bezmialem Vakif University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Integral University, Lucknow, India.
(3)Departmentof Botany and Microbiology, College of Sciences, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog signaling pathway (Hh) is abnormally stimulated in colon
cancer. Evidence suggests the therapeutic effectiveness of andrographolide
against several cancers. This study attempts to delineate the effect of
andrographolide on Hh signaling pathway in colon cancer HCT-116 cells. Methods:
Effects of andrographolide were studied on HCT-116 cells by evaluating
cytotoxicity by MTT assay, morphology assessment, trypan blue exclusion, and
colony formation assay; migratory potential by scratch assay; apoptosis by DAPI, 
Hoechst staining, FITC-Annexin V assay, and caspases activation; mitochondrial
membrane potential (ΔΨm) by Mito Tracker and Rhodamine 123. Intracellular ROS by 
DCFH-DA staining. Cell cycle regulation by flow cytometry. Expression of BAX,
BAD, BCL2, Cyclin B1, CDK1, Smo, and Gli1 by qRT-PCR. Interaction between
andrographolide and Smo protein by in-silico molecular docking. Results:
Andrographolide induced antiproliferative effect on HCT-116 cells in a
dose-dependent and time-dependent manner. It also induced apoptosis and
anti-migratory effect in HCT-116 cells. In combination with 5FU, andrographolide 
exhibited synergistic effect. It Induced G2/M phase arrest through downregulating
CDK1 and Cyclin B1. Andrographolide also inhibited Hh signaling by downregulating
Smo and Gli1 in HCT-116 cells. It showed high affinity toward Smo protein
in-silico. Conclusion: Andrographolide repressed the colon cancer cell growth via
inhibiting Hh signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1080/01635581.2020.1828942 
PMID: 33030050 

