
1. Immunohorizons. 2020 Oct 9;4(10):597-607. doi: 10.4049/immunohorizons.2000041.

A Chimeric Antigen Receptor That Binds to a Conserved Site on MICA.

Cook WJ(1), Choi Y(2), Gacerez A(1), Bailey-Kellogg C(2), Sentman CL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Synthetic Immunity, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756; and.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755.
(3)Center for Synthetic Immunity, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756; and
charles.sentman@dartmouth.edu.

The NKG2D ligand MHC class I chain-related protein A (MICA) is expressed on many 
varieties of malignant cells but is absent from most normal tissues, and thus
represents a potential target for chimeric Ag receptor (CAR) T cell-based
therapeutics. However, there are more than 100 alleles of MICA, so the ability to
target a conserved site is needed for a therapy to be used in most patients. In
this study, we describe a fully human anti-MICA CAR created by fusing the
single-chain fragment variable B2 to the full length DAP10 protein and the
traditional CD3ζ signaling domain. Human T cells expressing the B2 CAR killed
MICA-positive tumor cells, produced IFN-γ when in contact with MICA-positive
tumor cells or plate-bound MICA protein, and inhibited PANC-1 growth in a mouse
xenograft model. To localize B2's epitope on MICA, we used novel computational
methods to model potential binding modes and to design mutational variants of
MICA testing these hypotheses. Flow cytometry using a commercial anti-MICA/MICB
Ab indicated that the variant proteins were expressed at high levels on
transduced P815 cell lines. One variant protein (R38S/K40T/K57E) showed reduced
staining with a B2-IgG1 fusion protein compared with controls and did not induce 
IFN-γ production by human T cells expressing the B2 CAR. These results show
antitumor activity of MICA-specific CAR T cells and indicate an essential role
for a conserved site in the exposed loop involving aa 38-57 of MICA. This study
describes a novel MICA-specific CAR and discusses its potential use as a cancer
therapeutic.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.4049/immunohorizons.2000041 
PMID: 33037097 

