
1. PLoS One. 2020 Oct 9;15(10):e0239924. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239924.
eCollection 2020.

Clinical and molecular characteristics of carbapenem non-susceptible Escherichia 
coli: A nationwide survey from Oman.

Al-Farsi HM(1)(2), Camporeale A(1), Ininbergs K(1)(3), Al-Azri S(2), Al-Muharrmi 
Z(4), Al-Jardani A(2), Giske CG(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Central Public Health Laboratories, Ministry of Health, Muscat, Oman.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital,
Muscat, Oman.

The prevalence of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales (CRE) in the Arabian
Peninsula is predicted to be high, as suggested from published case reports. Of
particular concern, is carbapenem-resistant E. coli (CR-EC), due to the
importance of this species as a community pathogen. Herein, we conducted a
comprehensive molecular characterization of putative CR-EC strains from Oman. We 
aim to establish a baseline for future molecular monitoring. We performed
whole-genome sequencing (WGS) for 35 putative CR-EC. Isolates were obtained from 
patients at multiple centers in 2015. Genetic relatedness was investigated using 
several typing approaches such as MLST, SNP calling, phylogroup and CRISPR
typing. Maxiuium likelihood SNP-tree was performed by RAxML after variant calling
and removal of recombination regions with Snippy and Gubbins, respectively.
Resistance genes, plasmid replicon types, virulence genes, and prophage were also
characterised. The online databases CGE, CRISPRcasFinder, Phaster and EnteroBase 
were used for the in silico analyses. Screening for mutations in genes regulating
the expression of porins and efflux pump as well as mutations lead to
fluoroquinolones resistance were performed with CLC Genomics Workbench. The
genetic diversity suggests a polyclonal population structure with 21 sequence
types (ST), of which ST38 being the most prevalent (11%). SNPs analysis revealed 
possible transmission episodes. Whereas, CRISPR typing helped to spot outlier
strains belonged to phylogroups other than B2 which was CRISPR-free. The virulent
phylogroups B2 and D were detected in 4 and 9 isolates, respectively. In some
strains bacteriophages acted as vectors for virulence genes. Regarding resistance
to Î²-lactam, 22 were carbapenemase producers, 3 carbapenem non-susceptible but
carbapenemase-negative, 9 resistant to expanded-spectrum cephalosporins, and one 
isolate with susceptibility to cephalosporins and carbapenems. Thirteen out of
the 22 (59%) carbapenemase-producing isolates were NDM and 7 (23%) were
OXA-48-like which mirrors the situation in Indian subcontinent. Two isolates
co-produced NDM and OXA-48-like enzymes. In total, 80% (28/35) were CTX-M-15
producers and 23% (8/35) featured AmpC. The high-risk subclones ST131-H30Rx/C2,
ST410-H24RxC and ST1193-H64RxC were detected, the latter associated with NDM. To 
our knowledge, this is the first report of ST1193-H64Rx subclone with NDM. In
conclusion, strains showed polyclonal population structure with OXA-48 and NDM as
the only carbapenemases in CR-EC from Oman. We detected the high-risk subclone
ST131-H30Rx/C2, ST410-H24RxC and ST1193-H64RxC. The latter was reported with
carbapenemase gene for the first time here.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239924 
PMCID: PMC7546912
PMID: 33036018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

