
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Oct 6;21(19). pii: E7370. doi: 10.3390/ijms21197370.

Surface Modification by Nano-Structures Reduces Viable Bacterial Biofilm in
Aerobic and Anaerobic Environments.

Ya'ari S(1)(2)(3), Halperin-Sternfeld M(1)(2)(3), Rosin B(1)(2)(3),
Adler-Abramovich L(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, The Goldschleger School of Dental Medicine,
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel.
(2)The Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
6997801, Israel.
(3)The Center for the Physics and Chemistry of Living Systems, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel.

Bacterial biofilm formation on wet surfaces represents a significant problem in
medicine and environmental sciences. One of the strategies to prevent or
eliminate surface adhesion of organisms is surface modification and coating.
However, the current coating technologies possess several drawbacks, including
limited durability, low biocompatibility and high cost. Here, we present a simple
antibacterial modification of titanium, mica and glass surfaces using
self-assembling nano-structures. We have designed two different nano-structure
coatings composed of fluorinated phenylalanine via the drop-cast coating
technique. We investigated and characterized the modified surfaces by scanning
electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction and wettability analyses. Exploiting the
antimicrobial property of the nano-structures, we successfully hindered the
viability of Streptococcus mutans and Enterococcus faecalis on the coated
surfaces in both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Notably, we found lower
bacteria adherence to the coated surfaces and a reduction of 86-99% in the total 
metabolic activity of the bacteria. Our results emphasize the interplay between
self-assembly and antimicrobial activity of small self-assembling molecules, thus
highlighting a new approach of biofilm control for implementation in biomedicine 
and other fields.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21197370 
PMCID: PMC7582899
PMID: 33036210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

