
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2020 Dec 17;533(4):1177-1183. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.09.136. Epub 2020 Oct 9.

Biochemical properties and crystal structure of isocitrate lyase from Bacillus
cereus ATCC 14579.

Lee SH(1), Ki D(1), Kim S(2), Kim IK(2), Kim KJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, KNU Creative BioResearch Group, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, 41566, Republic of Korea; KNU Institute for Microorganisms,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 41566, Republic of Korea.
(2)KNU Institute for Microorganisms, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 41566,
Republic of Korea.
(3)School of Life Sciences, KNU Creative BioResearch Group, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, 41566, Republic of Korea; KNU Institute for Microorganisms,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 41566, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: kkim@knu.ac.kr.

The glyoxylate cycle is an important anabolic pathway and acts under a C2
compound (such as acetic acid) rich condition in bacteria. The isocitrate lyase
(ICL) enzyme catalyzes the first step in the glyoxylate cycle, which is the
cleavage of isocitrate to glyoxylate and succinate. This enzyme is a
metalo-enzyme that contains an Mg2+ or a Mn2+ion at the active site for enzyme
catalysis. We expressed and purified ICL from Bacillus cereus (BcICL) and
investigated its biochemical properties and metal usage through its enzyme
activity and stability with various divalent metal ion. Based on the results,
BcICL mainly utilized the Mg2+ ion for enzyme catalysis as well as the Mn2+, Ni2+
and Co2+ ions. To elucidate its molecular mechanisms, we determined the crystal
structure of BcICL at 1.79 Å. Through this structure, we analyzed a tetrameric
interaction of the protein. We also determined the BcICL structure in complex
with both the metal and its products, glyoxylate and succinate at 2.50 Å
resolution and revealed each ligand binding modes.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.09.136 
PMID: 33041004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

