
1. Chemosphere. 2021 Feb;264(Pt 2):128514. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128514.
Epub 2020 Oct 4.

Characterization, genome functional analysis, and detoxification of atrazine by
Arthrobacter sp. C2.

Cao D(1), He S(2), Li X(3), Shi L(4), Wang F(4), Yu S(4), Xu S(3), Ju C(4), Fang 
H(1), Yu Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, Hangzhou, 310058, China; 
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects, Hangzhou,
310058, China; Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects 
of Zhejiang Province, College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(2)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, Hangzhou, 310058, China; 
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects, Hangzhou,
310058, China.
(3)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, Hangzhou, 310058, China; 
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects of Zhejiang
Province, College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(4)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(5)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, Hangzhou, 310058, China; 
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects, Hangzhou,
310058, China; Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects 
of Zhejiang Province, College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, 310058, China. Electronic address: ylyu@zju.edu.cn.

Residual injury of atrazine to the succeeding crops has been frequently reported.
It is necessary to find a solution for the detoxification of atrazine
contaminated soil. A high-efficient bacterial strain Arthrobacter sp. C2 for
atrazine degradation was isolated in this study. The genomic information of the
isolate C2, and its degradation characteristics and potential application in
detoxification of atrazine contaminated soil were investigated. The results
indicated that the isolate C2 genome contained 4,305,216 bp nucleotides, three
plasmids, and 4705 coding genes. The degradation rates of atrazine at levels of
1, 10, 100 mg/L by the isolate C2 were 0.34, 1.94, 18.64 mg/L/d, respectively.
The optimum temperature and pH for the isolate C2 to degrade atrazine were 30 °C 
and 7.0-9.0. Based on the metabolites detected by UPLC-TOF-MS/MS and genome
annotation of the isolate C2, a common metabolic pathway of atrazine was proposed
as that atrazine is firstly dechlorinated into hydroxyatrazine, and subsequently 
to N-isopropylammelide via dealkylation, and ultimately deaminated to cyanuric
acid. Introduction of the isolate C2 into soil can enhance degradation of
atrazine and thus eliminate the toxic effect of this herbicide on wheat growth.
Our results indicate that the strain C2 could be a potential bioresource for
bioremediation of atrazine contaminated soil.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128514 
PMID: 33045503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

