
1. RNA Biol. 2020 Oct 12:1-18. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2020.1827784. [Epub ahead of
print]

The mRNA derived MalH sRNA contributes to alternative carbon source utilization
by tuning maltoporin expression in E. coli.

Iosub IA(1), Marchioretto M(2), van Nues RW(3), McKellar S(1), Viero G(2),
Granneman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Synthetic and Systems Biology, University of Edinburgh ,
Edinburgh0, UK.
(2)Institute of Biophysics, CNR Unit at Trento , Trento, Italy.
(3)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh, UK.

Previous high-throughput studies in Gram-negative bacteria identified a large
number of 3'UTR fragments that potentially function as sRNAs. Here we extensively
characterize the MalH sRNA. We show that MalH is a stable degradation
intermediate derived from the 3' end of malG, which is part of the maltose uptake
operon transcript malEFG. Unlike the majority of bacterial sRNAs, MalH is
transiently expressed during the transition from the exponential to the
stationary growth phase, suggesting that it contributes to adaptation to changes 
in nutrient availability. Over-expression of MalH reduces expression of general
outer membrane porins and MicA, a repressor of the high-affinity
maltose/maltodextrin transporter LamB. Disrupting MalH production and function
significantly reduces lamB accumulation when maltose is the only available carbon
source, presumably due to the accumulation of the MicA repressor. We propose that
MalH is part of a regulatory network that, during the transition phase, directly 
or indirectly promotes accumulation of high-affinity maltose transporters in the 
outer membrane by dampening competing pathways.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2020.1827784 
PMID: 33043783 

