
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2020 Dec;70(12):6147-6154. doi:
10.1099/ijsem.0.004510.

Flavobacterium salmonis sp. nov. isolated from Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and 
formal proposal to reclassify Flavobacterium spartansii as a later heterotypic
synonym of Flavobacterium tructae.

Kämpfer P(1), Irgang R(2), Glaeser SP(1), Busse HJ(3), Criscuolo A(4), Clermont
D(5), Avendaño-Herrera R(6)(2)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Angewandte Mikrobiologie, Universität Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Centro FONDAP, Interdisciplinary Center for Aquaculture Research (INCAR), Viña
del Mar, Chile.
(3)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Veterinärmedizinische Universität, A-1210 Wien,
Austria.
(4)Hub de Bioinformatique et Biostatistique Département Biologie
Computationnelle, Institut Pasteur, USR 3756 CNRS - Paris, France.
(5)Institut Pasteur - CIP - Collection of Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(6)Universidad Andrés Bello, Laboratorio de Patología de Organismos Acuáticos y
Biotecnología Acuícola, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Viña del Mar, Chile.
(7)Universidad Andrés Bello, Centro de Investigación Marina Quintay (CIMARQ),
Quintay, Chile.

A Gram-staining-negative non endospore-forming strain, T13(2019)T was isolated
from water samples from Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) fry culture in Chile and
studied in detail for its taxonomic position. The isolate shared highest 16S rRNA
gene sequence similarities with the type strains of Flavobacterium chungangense
(98.44 %) followed by Flavobacterium tructae and Flavobacterium spartansii (both 
98.22 %). Menaquinone MK-6 was the predominant respiratory quinone in T13(2019)T.
Major polar lipids were phosphatidylethanolamine, an ornithine lipid and the
unidentified polar lipids L1, L3 and L4 lacking a functional group. The major
polyamine was sym-homospermidine. The fatty acid profile contained major amounts 
of iso-C15 : 0, iso-C15 : 0 3-OH, iso-C17 : 0 3-OH, C15 : 0, summed feature 3
(C16 : 1  ω7c and/or iso-C15 : 0 2-OH) and various hydroxylated fatty acids in
smaller amounts, among them iso-C16 : 0 3-OH, and C15 : 0 3-OH, which supported
the grouping of the isolate into the genus Flavobacterium.
Physiological/biochemical characterisation and ANI calculations with the type
strains of the most closely related species allowed a clear phenotypic and
genotypic differentiation. In addition it became obvious, that the type strains
of F. tructae and F. spartansii showed 100 % 16S rRNA gene sequence similarities 
and ANI values of 97.21%/ 97.59 % and DDH values of 80.40 % [77.5 and 83%]. These
data indicate that F. tructae and F. spartansii belong to the same species and it
is proposed that F. spartansii is a later heterotypic synonym of F. tructae. For 
strain T13(2019)T (=CIP 111411T=LMG 30298T=CCM 8798T) a new species with the name
Flavobacterium salmonis sp. nov. is proposed.

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.004510 
PMID: 33052804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

