
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Oct 9;21(20). pii: E7445. doi: 10.3390/ijms21207445.

Recombinant Bacillus caldovelox Arginase Mutant (BCA-M) Induces Apoptosis,
Autophagy, Cell Cycle Arrest and Growth Inhibition in Human Cervical Cancer
Cells.

Chung SF(1), Kim CF(1), Chow HY(1), Chong HC(1), Tam SY(1), Leung YC(1), Lo
WH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, Lo Ka Chung Research
Centre for Natural Anti-Cancer Drug Development and State Key Laboratory of
Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung
Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

With our recent success in developing a recombinant human arginase drug against
broad-spectrum cancer cell lines, we have explored the potential of a recombinant
Bacillus caldovelox arginase mutant (BCA-M) for human cervical cancer treatment. 
Our studies demonstrated that BCA-M significantly inhibited the growth of human
cervical cancer cells in vitro regardless of argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS)
and argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) expression. Drug susceptibilities correlate
well with the expressions of major urea cycle genes and completeness of
L-arginine regeneration pathways. With the expressions of ASS and ASL genes
conferring resistance to L-arginine deiminase (ADI) which is undergoing Phase III
clinical trial, BCA-M offers the advantage of a broader spectrum of susceptible
cancer cells. Mechanistic studies showed that BCA-M inhibited the growth of human
cervical cancer cells by inducing apoptosis and cell cycle arrest at S and/or
G2/M phases. Our results also displayed that autophagy served as a protective
mechanism, while the growth inhibitory effects of BCA-M could be enhanced
synergistically by its combination to the autophagy inhibitor, chloroquine (CQ), 
on human cervical cancer cells.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21207445 
PMCID: PMC7589785
PMID: 33050217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

