
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Oct 13;10(1):17091. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-72726-9.

Impact of varied combinatorial mixture of non-fishmeal ingredients on growth,
metabolism, immunity and gut microbiota of Lates calcarifer (Bloch, 1790) fry.

Gupta SK(1)(2), Fotedar R(3), Foysal MJ(3)(4), Priyam M(5), Siddik MAB(3)(6),
Chaklader MR(3), Dao TTT(3), Howieson J(3).

Author information: 
(1)ICAR-Indian Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology, Ranchi, Jharkhand, India.
sanfish111@gmail.com.
(2)School of Molecular and Life Sciences, Curtin University, Bentley, WA,
Australia. sanfish111@gmail.com.
(3)School of Molecular and Life Sciences, Curtin University, Bentley, WA,
Australia.
(4)Department of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Shahjalal University of
Science and Technology, Sylhet, Bangladesh.
(5)ICAR-Indian Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology, Ranchi, Jharkhand, India.
(6)Department of Fisheries Biology and Genetics, Patuakhali Science and
Technology University, Patuakhali, 8602, Bangladesh.

The search for suitable fish meal replacements in aqua-diets is a salient agenda 
in the constant effort of making aquaculture practices more sustainable. In this 
study, we tested four customised diets composed by systematic inclusion of
pre-selected fish meal substitutes, lupin kernel meal, BSF meal, TH and PBM on
growth, metabolism, cytokine profile, gut morphology and microbiota of juvenile
Lates calcarifer. Five isoproteic and isoenergetic diets were prepared viz. FM100
as a control (without fish meal substitute), while FM75, FM50, FM25 and FM0
indicates replacement of fish meal (FM) at 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%, respectively 
by a mixture of four different pre-selected non-fish meal (NFM) ingredients. Fish
fed FM100, FM75, FM50, FM25 exhibited consistent growth and haematological
response, while the fish fed no fishmeal (FM0) showed significant decline in
final body weight (FBW) and specific growth rate (SGR). The poor growth
performance was correlated with a decrease in villous width, microvilli height
and goblet cells density. A significant shift in abundance profile of
Psychrobacter in the gut microbial profile of fish fed FM50 was noticed compared 
to fish fed FM100. The results of qRT-PCR showed up-regulated expression of
innate immune responsive genes in the FM50 group. The adverse impacts on growth
performance and gut health of fish fed FM0 suggest that the complete substitution
of fishmeal is not advisable and the inclusion range of these alternatives should
be decided for a species only after examining their effect on maximal
physiological performance.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-72726-9 
PMCID: PMC7555901
PMID: 33051467  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

