
1. Vet Sci. 2020 Oct 9;7(4). pii: E151. doi: 10.3390/vetsci7040151.

Roughage to Concentrate Ratio and Saccharomyces cerevisiae Inclusion Could
Modulate Feed Digestion and In Vitro Ruminal Fermentation.

Phesatcha K(1), Phesatcha B(2), Wanapat M(3), Cherdthong A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture and Technology, Nakhon
Phanom University, Nakhon Phanom 48000, Thailand.
(2)Department of Agricultural Technology and Environment, Faculty of Sciences and
Liberal Arts, Rajamangala University of Technology Isan, Nakhon Ratchasima 30000,
Thailand.
(3)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002,
Thailand.

The objective of this research was to investigate the effect of the
roughage-to-concentrate (R:C) ratio and the addition of live yeast (LY) on
ruminal fermentation characteristics and methane (CH4) production. The
experimental design was randomly allocated according to a completely randomized
design in a 4 × 4 factorial arrangement. The first factor was four rations of R:C
at 80:20, 60:40, 40:60, and 20:80, and the second factor was an additional four
doses of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (live yeast; LY) at 0, 2.0 × 106, 4.0 × 106,
and 6.0 × 106 colony-forming unit (cfu), respectively. For the in vitro method,
during the incubation, the gas production was noted at 0, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 
18, 24, 48, 72, and 96 h. The rumen solution mixture was collected at 0, 4, 8,
12, and 24 h of incubating after inoculation. Cumulative gas production at 96 h
was highest in the R:C ratio, at 20:80, while the addition of LY improves the
kinetics and accumulation of gas (p > 0.05). Maximum in vitro dry matter
digestibility (IVDMD) and in vitro organic matter digestibility (IVOMD) at 24 h
after incubation were achieved at the R:C ratio 20:80 and the addition of LY at 6
× 106 cfu, which were greater than the control by 13.7% and 12.4%, respectively. 
Ruminal pH at 8 h after incubation decreased with an increased proportion of
concentrates in the diet, whereas it was lowest when the R:C ratio was at 20:80. 
Increasing the proportion of a concentrate diet increased total volatile fatty
acid (TVFA) and propionic acid (C3), whereas the acetic acid (C2) and C2-to-C3
ratios decreased (p < 0.05). TVFA and C3 increased with the addition of LY at 6 ×
106 cfu, which was greater than the control by 11.5% and 17.2%, respectively. No 
interaction effect was observed between the R:C ratio and LY on the CH4
concentration. The calculated ruminal CH4 production decreased with the
increasing proportion of concentrates in the diet, particularly the R:C ratio at 
20:80. The CH4 production for LY addition at 6 × 106 cfu was lower than the
control treatment by 17.2%. Moreover, the greatest populations of bacteria,
protozoa, and fungi at 8 h after incubation were found with the addition of LY at
6 × 106 cfu, which were higher than the control by 19.0%, 20.7%, and 40.4%,
respectively. In conclusion, a high ratio of roughage and the concentrate and
addition of LY at 6.0 × 106 cfu of the total dietary substrate could improve
rumen fermentation, improve feed digestibility, and reduce the CH4 production.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci7040151 
PMCID: PMC7712883
PMID: 33050260 

