
1. J Hazard Mater. 2021 Feb 15;404(Pt B):124006. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124006.
Epub 2020 Sep 23.

Mechanisms of the enhanced DDT removal from soils by earthworms: Identification
of DDT degraders in drilosphere and non-drilosphere matrices.

Xu HJ(1), Bai J(2), Li W(1), Murrell JC(3), Zhang Y(1), Wang J(1), Luo C(1), Li
Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Joint Institute for Environmental Research & Education, College of Natural
Resources and Environment, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642,
China.
(2)Joint Institute for Environmental Research & Education, College of Natural
Resources and Environment, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642,
China; College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Hunan University of Humanities, 
Science and Technology, Loudi 417000, China.
(3)School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, 
UK.
(4)Joint Institute for Environmental Research & Education, College of Natural
Resources and Environment, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642,
China. Electronic address: yongtao@scau.edu.cn.

The remediation of soil contaminated by
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT) remains an important issue in
environmental research. Although our previous studies demonstrated that
earthworms could enhance the degradation of DDT in soils, the underlying
mechanisms and microorganisms involved in these transformation processes are
still not clear. Here we studied the transformation of DDT in
sterilized/non-sterilized drilosphere and non-drilosphere matrices and identified
DDT degraders using the technique of DNA-stable isotope probing. The results show
that DDT degradation in non-sterilized drilosphere was quicker than that in their
non-drilosphere counterparts. Earthworms enhance DDT removal mainly by improving 
soil properties, thus stimulating indigenous microorganisms rather than abiotic
degradation or tissue accumulating. Ten new genera, including Streptomyces,
Streptacidiphilus, Dermacoccus, Brevibacterium, Bacillus, Virgibacillus, were
identified as DDT ring cleavage degrading bacteria in the five matrices tested.
Bacillus and Dermacoccus may also play vital roles in the dechlorination of DDTs 
as they were highly enriched during the incubations. The results of this study
provide robust evidence for the application of earthworms in remediating soils
polluted with DDT and highlight the importance of using combinations of
cultivation-independent techniques together with process-based measurements to
examine the function of microbes degrading organic pollutants in drilosphere
matrices.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124006 
PMID: 33068995 

