
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Oct 22;10(1):18037. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-74845-9.

Therapeutic effects of antibiotics loaded cellulose nanofiber and κ-carrageenan
oligosaccharide composite hydrogels for periodontitis treatment.

Johnson A(1), Kong F(2), Miao S(3), Lin HV(1), Thomas S(4), Huang YC(1), Kong
ZL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, National Taiwan Ocean University, Pei-Ning Road,
Keelung, 20224, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Georgia, 100 Cedar
Street, Athens, GA, 30602, USA.
(3)Teagasc Food Research Centre, Moorepark, Fermoy, Co., Cork, P61 C996, Ireland.
(4)School of Energy Studies and School of Chemical Sciences, Mahatma Gandhi
University, Priyadarshini Hills P.O, Kottayam, Kerala, 686560, India.
(5)Department of Food Science, National Taiwan Ocean University, Pei-Ning Road,
Keelung, 20224, Taiwan, ROC. kongzl@mail.ntou.edu.tw.

Periodontitis is an inflammatory disease that can lead to the periodontal pocket 
formation and tooth loss. This study was aimed to develop antimicrobials loaded
hydrogels composed of cellulose nanofibers (CNF) and κ-carrageenan
oligosaccharides (CO) nanoparticles for the treatment of periodontitis. Two
antimicrobial agents such as surfactin and Herbmedotcin were selected as the
therapeutic agents and the hydrogels were formulated based on the increasing
concentration of surfactin. The proposed material has high thermal stability,
controlled release, and water absorption capacity. This study was proceeded by
investigating the in vitro antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties of the 
hydrogels. This material has strong antibacterial activity against periodontal
pathogens such as Streptococcus mutans, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Fusobacterium
nucleatum, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Moreover, a significant increase in
malondialdehyde (MDA) production and a decrease in biofilm formation and
metabolic activity of the bacteria was observed in the presence of hydrogel.
Besides, it reduced the reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, transcription
factor, and cytokines production in human gingival fibroblast cells (HGF) under
inflammatory conditions. In conclusion, the hydrogels were successfully developed
and proven to have antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties for the
treatment of periodontitis. Thus, it can be used as an excellent candidate for
periodontitis treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-74845-9 
PMCID: PMC7581766
PMID: 33093521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

