
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Oct 20;21(20). pii: E7770. doi: 10.3390/ijms21207770.

Rab8 and Rabin8-Mediated Tumor Formation by Hyperactivated EGFR Signaling via
FGFR Signaling.

Choi J(1), Sung JY(1), Lee S(1), Yoo J(1), Rongo C(2), Kim YN(1), Shim J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of National Cancer Center, 323 Ilsan-ro, Goyang,
Gyeonggi-do 10408, Korea.
(2)Waksman Institute of Microbiology, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey, 190 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling is important for normal
development, such as vulval development in Caenorhabditis elegans, and
hyperactivation of the EGFR is often associated with cancer development. Our
previous report demonstrated the multivulva (Muv) phenotype, a tumor model in C. 
elegans (jgIs25 strain) by engineering LET-23/EGFR with a TKI-resistant human
EGFR T790-L858 mutant. Because Rab proteins regulate vesicle transport, which is 
important for receptor signaling, we screened the RNAi in the jgIs25 strain to
find the Rabs critical for Muv formation. Herein, we show that rab-8 RNAi and the
rab-8 (-/-) mutation effectively reduce Muv formation. We demonstrate that
RABN-8, an ortholog of Rabin8, known as a GEF for Rab8, is also required for Muv 
formation by promoting the secretion of EGL-17/FGF from vulval precursor cells.
In addition, FGFR inhibitors decreased Muv formation mediated by mutant EGFR. Our
data suggest that Rab8 and Rabin8 mediate Muv formation through FGF secretion in 
the EGFR-TKI-resistant nematode model. Furthermore, FGFR-TKIs more effectively
inhibit the growth of lung cancer cell lines in H1975 (EGFR T790M-L858R;
EGFR-TKI-resistant) than H522 (wild-type EGFR) and H1650 (EGFR exon 19 deletion; 
EGFR-TKI-sensitive) cells, suggesting that FGFR-TKIs could be used to control
cancers with EGFR-TKI-resistant mutations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21207770 
PMCID: PMC7589727
PMID: 33092268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

