
1. PLoS One. 2020 Oct 26;15(10):e0229430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229430.
eCollection 2020.

Markers of acute toxicity of DDT exposure in pancreatic beta-cells determined by 
a proteomic approach.

Pavlikova N(1), Sramek J(1), Jelinek M(1), Halada P(2), Kovar J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology & Center for Research
of Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)BioCeV-Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Vestec, Czech
Republic.

Many compounds have the potential to harm pancreatic beta-cells; organochlorine
pollutants belong to those compounds. In this work, we aimed to find markers of
acute toxicity of p,p'-DDT exposure among proteins expressed in NES2Y human
pancreatic beta-cells employing 2-D electrophoresis. We exposed NES2Y cells to a 
high concentration (150 Î¼M, LC96 after 72 hours) of p,p'-DDT for 24 and 30 hours 
and determined proteins with changed expression using 2-D electrophoresis. We
have found 22 proteins that changed their expression. They included proteins
involved in ER stress (GRP78, and endoplasmin), mitochondrial proteins (GRP75,
ECHM, IDH3A, NDUS1, and NDUS3), proteins involved in the maintenance of the cell 
morphology (EFHD2, TCPA, NDRG1, and ezrin), and some other proteins (HNRPF,
HNRH1, K2C8, vimentin, PBDC1, EF2, PCNA, biliverdin reductase, G3BP1, FRIL, and
HSP27). The proteins we have identified may serve as indicators of p,p'-DDT
toxicity in beta-cells in future studies, including long-term exposure to
environmentally relevant concentrations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229430 
PMCID: PMC7588079
PMID: 33104727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

