
1. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2020 Oct 28. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00207.2020. [Epub ahead of print]

Proteomic analysis of mitochondrial biogenesis in cardiomyocytes differentiated
from human induced pluripotent stem cells.

Venkatesh S(1), Baljinnyam E(2), Tong M(2), Kashihara T(2), Yan L(3), Liu T(3),
Li H(3), Xie LH(2), Nakamura M(2), Oka SI(2), Suzuki CK(1), Fraidenraich D(2),
Sadoshima J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers
University-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, United States.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Rutgers University-New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, United States.
(3)Center for Advanced Proteomics Research and Department of Microbiology,
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cancer Center, Rutgers University-New Jersey 
Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, United States.

Mitochondria play key roles in the differentiation and maturation of human
cardiomyocytes (CMs). As human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) hold potential in the treatment of heart diseases, we 
sought to identify key mitochondrial pathways and regulators, which may provide
targets for improving cardiac differentiation and maturation. Proteomic analysis 
was performed on enriched mitochondrial protein extracts isolated from hiPSC-CMs 
differentiated from dermal fibroblasts (dFCM) and cardiac fibroblasts (cFCM) at
time points between 12 and 115 days of differentiation, and from adult and
neonatal mouse hearts. Mitochondrial proteins with a 2-fold change at time points
up to 120 days relative to 12 days were subjected to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
(IPA). The highest upregulation was in metabolic pathways for fatty acid
oxidation (FAO), the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS) and branched chain amino acid (BCAA) degradation. The top upstream
regulators predicted to be activated were peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha (PGC1-Î±), the insulin receptor (IR) and the
retinoblastoma protein (Rb1) transcriptional repressor. IPA and immunoblotting
showed upregulation of the mitochondrial LonP1 protease - a regulator of
mitochondrial proteostasis, energetics and metabolism. LonP1 knockdown increased 
FAO in neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes (nRVMs). Our results support the
notion that LonP1 upregulation negatively regulates FAO in cardiomyocytes to
calibrate the flux between glucose and fatty acid oxidation. We discuss potential
mechanisms by which IR, Rb1 and LonP1 regulate the metabolic shift from
glycolysis to OXPHOS and FAO. These newly identified factors and pathways may
help in optimizing the maturation of iPSC-CMs.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.00207.2020 
PMID: 33112656 

