
1. mSphere. 2020 Oct 28;5(5). pii: e00990-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00990-20.

Genetic Determinants of Resistance to Extended-Spectrum Cephalosporin and
Fluoroquinolone in Escherichia coli Isolated from Diseased Pigs in the United
States.

Hayer SS(1)(2), Lim S(1)(3), Hong S(1)(4), Elnekave E(1), Johnson T(5), Rovira
A(1)(6), Vannucci F(1)(6), Clayton JB(2)(7), Perez A(1), Alvarez J(8)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(3)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Program, University of
Minnesota-Rochester, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(5)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(6)Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, College of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(7)Nebraska Food for Health Center, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln,
Nebraska, USA.
(8)Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA jalvarez@visavet.ucm.es.
(9)VISAVET Health Surveillance Center, Universidad Complutense Madrid, Madrid,
Spain.
(10)Department of Animal Health, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad Complutense
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Fluoroquinolones and cephalosporins are critically important antimicrobial
classes for both human and veterinary medicine. We previously found a drastic
increase in enrofloxacin resistance in clinical Escherichia coli isolates
collected from diseased pigs from the United States over 10 years (2006 to 2016).
However, the genetic determinants responsible for this increase have yet to be
determined. The aim of the present study was to identify and characterize the
genetic basis of resistance against fluoroquinolones (enrofloxacin) and
extended-spectrum cephalosporins (ceftiofur) in swine E. coli isolates using
whole-genome sequencing (WGS). bla CMY-2 (carried by IncA/C2, IncI1, and IncI2
plasmids), bla CTX-M (carried by IncF, IncHI2, and IncN plasmids), and bla SHV-12
(carried by IncHI2 plasmids) genes were present in 87 (82.1%), 19 (17.9%), and 3 
(2.83%) of the 106 ceftiofur-resistant isolates, respectively. Of the 110
enrofloxacin-resistant isolates, 90 (81.8%) had chromosomal mutations in gyrA,
gyrB, parA, and parC genes. Plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance genes [qnrB77, 
qnrB2, qnrS1, qnrS2, and aac-(6)-lb'-cr] borne on ColE, IncQ2, IncN, IncF, and
IncHI2 plasmids were present in 24 (21.8%) of the enrofloxacin-resistant
isolates. Virulent IncF plasmids present in swine E. coli isolates were highly
similar to epidemic plasmids identified globally. High-risk E. coli clones, such 
as ST744, ST457, ST131, ST69, ST10, ST73, ST410, ST12, ST127, ST167, ST58, ST88, 
ST617, ST23, etc., were also found in the U.S. swine population. Additionally,
the colistin resistance gene (mcr-9) was present in several isolates. This study 
adds valuable information regarding resistance to critical antimicrobials with
implications for both animal and human health.IMPORTANCE Understanding the
genetic mechanisms conferring resistance is critical to design informed control
and preventive measures, particularly when involving critically important
antimicrobial classes such as extended-spectrum cephalosporins and
fluoroquinolones. The genetic determinants of extended-spectrum cephalosporin and
fluoroquinolone resistance were highly diverse, with multiple plasmids, insertion
sequences, and genes playing key roles in mediating resistance in swine
Escherichia coli Plasmids assembled in this study are known to be disseminated
globally in both human and animal populations and environmental samples, and E.
coli in pigs might be part of a global reservoir of key antimicrobial resistance 
(AMR) elements. Virulent plasmids found in this study have been shown to confer
fitness advantages to pathogenic E. coli strains. The presence of international, 
high-risk zoonotic clones provides worrisome evidence that resistance in swine
isolates may have indirect public health implications, and the swine population
as a reservoir for these high-risk clones should be continuously monitored.

Copyright Â© 2020 Hayer et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00990-20 
PMID: 33115839 

