
1. Water Res. 2021 Jan 1;188:116554. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2020.116554. Epub 2020
Oct 22.

Novel strategy for membrane biofouling control in MBR with CdS/MIL-101 modified
PVDF membrane by in situ visible light irradiation.

Ni L(1), Zhu Y(1), Ma J(1), Wang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resources Reuse, Shanghai
Institute of Pollution Control and Ecological Security, College of Environmental 
Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, PR
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resources Reuse, Shanghai
Institute of Pollution Control and Ecological Security, College of Environmental 
Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, PR
China. Electronic address: yayi.wang@tongji.edu.cn.

Novel control strategies for membrane biofouling with eco-friendly photocatalytic
technology are critically needed in practical operation of membrane bioreactors
(MBRs). In this study, a metal-organic frameworks (MOF) based photocatalytic
membrane was firstly applied in an anammox MBR for a long-term biofouling
control, where bacteria were inactivated and foulants were degraded
simultaneously, with environmentally friendly and renewable visible light energy.
By physicochemical characterization, the synthesized photocatalyst of CdS/MIL-101
showed superior visible-light photocatalytic ability, and the 1 wt% CdS/MIL-101
modified membrane C2 showed enhanced hydrophilicity and water permeability
compared with the pristine membrane C0. In the long-term operation of anammox
MBRs under waterproof lights irradiation, the filtration cycles of C2 (25-26 d)
were obviously extended compared with C0 (10-14 d), while their average total
nitrogen removal efficiencies were comparable up to 84%, indicating an excellent 
biofouling alleviation effect by using C2 with a satisfactory nitrogen removal
performance maintained. By analysis of the biofilm on the fouled membranes, the
organic foulants (especially extracellular polymeric substances) were degraded,
and the live bacteria were inactivated effectively by the photocatalytic
reactions of CdS/MIL-101 on C2. In the antimicrobial tests against model
bacteria, C2 exhibited remarkable antimicrobial effect against both Gram-negative
and Gram-positive bacteria with visible light irradiation by destruction of cell 
integrity with the inhibition rate of 92% for Escherichia coli and 95% for
Staphylococcus aureus, respectively. In the model foulants (bovine serum albumin,
sodium alginate, and humic acid) filtration tests, C2 showed higher antifouling
capabilities, lower flux declining rates, and higher foulants rejection rates
under visible light irradiation compared with C0. The reactive species of ·OH, e-
and h+ generated on C2 were verified to play the predominant role in the
anti-biofouling processes by simultaneous bacteria inactivation and foulants
degradation. The findings offer a novel insight into the biofouling controlling
in MBRs by simultaneous bacteria inactivation and foulants degradation with an
eco-friendly method.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2020.116554 
PMID: 33128978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

