
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2020 Nov 13;6(11):3034-3047. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.0c00560.
Epub 2020 Nov 4.

Introduction of a Thio Functional Group to Diazabicyclooctane: An Effective
Modification to Potentiate the Activity of β-Lactams against Gram-Negative
Bacteria Producing Class A, C, and D Serine β-Lactamases.

Fujiu M(1), Yokoo K(1), Sato J(1), Shibuya S(1), Komano K(1), Kusano H(1), Sato
S(1), Aoki T(2), Kohira N(1), Miyagawa S(1), Kawachi T(1), Yamawaki K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shionogi Pharmaceutical Research Center, Toyonaka-shi, Osaka 561-0825, Japan.
(2)Shionogi CMC Research Innovation Center, Amagasaki-shi, Hyogo 660-0813, Japan.

By the emergence and worldwide spread of multi-drug-resistant Gram-negative
bacteria, there have been growing demands for efficacious drugs to cure these
resistant infections. The key mechanism for resistance to β-lactam antibiotics is
the production of β-lactamases, which hydrolyze and deactivate β-lactams.
Diazabicyclooctane (DBO) analogs play an important role as one of the new classes
of β-lactamase inhibitors (BLIs), and several compounds such as avibactam (AVI)
have been approved by the FDA, along with many derivatives under clinical or
preclinical development. Although these compounds have a similar amide
substituent at the C2 position, we have recently reported the synthesis of novel 
DBO analogs which possess a thio functional group. This structural modification
enhances the ability to restore the antimicrobial activities of cefixime (CMF)
against pathogens producing classes A, C, and D serine β-lactamases compared with
AVI and expands the structural tolerance at the six position. Furthermore, some
of these analogs showed intrinsic microbial activities based on multipenicillin
binding protein (PBP) inhibition. This is the unique feature which has never been
observed in DBOs. One of our DBOs had a pharmacokinetic profile comparable to
that of other DBOs. These results indicate that the introduction of a thio
functional group into DBO is a novel and effective modification to discover a
clinically useful new BLI.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.0c00560 
PMID: 33147950 

