
1. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2020 Oct;36(10):884-889.

[Bioinformatics analysis and construction of eukaryotic expression vector of
MAGE-D4].

[Article in Chinese]

Li X(1), Deng Y(1), Gu Y(2), Gao J(1), Luo Y(3), Lin W(3), Xie X(4), He S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medicine,
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning 530021, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning 530021, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medicine,
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning 530021; Guangxi Colleges and Universities Key
Laboratory of Biological Molecular Medicine Research, Nanning 530021, China.
(4)Department of Histology and Embryology, College of Basic Medicine, Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning 530021, China.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medicine,
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning 530021; Guangxi Colleges and Universities Key
Laboratory of Biological Molecular Medicine Research, Nanning 530021, China.
*Corresponding author, E-mail:heshujia@gxmu.edu.cn.

Objective To analyze the physicochemical properties, structure and function of
melanoma-associated antigen D4 (MAGE-D4) protein, and then construct the
eukaryotic expression vector of MAGE-D4. Methods The physicochemical properties, 
structure and function of MAGE-D4 protein were analyzed by bioinformatics. Using 
MAGE-D4/pMAL-C2 prokaryotic recombinant plasmid as the template, PCR product
digested by restriction enzyme was connected with pEGFP-C1 eukaryotic expression 
plasmid and transformed into E. coli. Ligation products were identified by
antibiotic screening, enzyme digestion and sequencing. Then the recombinant
plasmid was transfected into A549 lung cancer cells by liposome. Results MAGE-D4 
protein was an unstable hydrophilic protein without transmembrane structure and
signal peptide. Its secondary structure was mainly Î±-helix. MAGE-D4 contained
multiple functional modification sites and was mainly located in the nucleus.
SLLLVILGV might be a restricted T cell epitope of HLA-A*0201 derived from
MAGE-D4. The first three proteins to potentially interact with MAGE-D4 were
NSMCE4A, MLANA/MART-1 and BAGE5. DNA sequencing showed that the recombinant
plasmid contained full-length coding sequence (CDS) of MAGE-D4 and it could be
successfully transfected into A549 lung cancer cells. Conclusion MAGE-D4 protein 
is an unstable nuclear protein, which may play functions by interacting with a
variety of melanoma-related proteins. The peptide derived from MAGE-D4 may have
strong immunogenicity. The eukaryotic expression vector of MAGE-D4 has been
successfully constructed.


PMID: 33148382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

