
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Nov 4;8(11). pii: E1723. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8111723.

On a Non-Discrete Concept of Prokaryotic Species.

Gonzalez JM(1), Puerta-Fernández E(1), Santana MM(2), Rekadwad B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Recursos Naturales y Agrobiología, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, IRNAS-CSIC, Avda. Reina Mercedes 10, 41012 Sevilla, 
Spain.
(2)Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes (cE3c), Faculdade de
Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Edifício C2, Campo Grande, 1749-016 Lisboa,
Portugal.
(3)National Centre for Microbial Resource, National Centre for Cell Science, NCCS
Complex, Savitribai Phule Pune University Campus, Ganeshkhind Road, Maharashtra
State, Pune 411007, India.

The taxonomic concept of species has received continuous attention. A microbial
species as a discrete box contains a limited number of highly similar
microorganisms assigned to that taxon, following a polyphasic approach. In the
21st Century, with the advancements of sequencing technologies and genomics, the 
existence of a huge prokaryotic diversity has become well known. At present, the 
prokaryotic species might no longer have to be understood as discrete values
(such as 1 or 2, by homology to Natural numbers); rather, it is expected that
some microorganisms could be potentially distributed (according to their genome
features and phenotypes) in between others (such as decimal numbers between 1 and
2; real numbers). We propose a continuous species concept for microorganisms,
which adapts to the current knowledge on the huge diversity, variability and
heterogeneity existing among bacteria and archaea. Likely, this concept could be 
extended to eukaryotic microorganisms. The continuous species concept considers a
species to be delimited by the distance between a range of variable features
following a Gaussian-type distribution around a reference organism (i.e., its
type strain). Some potential pros and cons of a continuous concept are commented 
on, offering novel perspectives on our understanding of the highly diversified
prokaryotic world, thus promoting discussion and further investigation in the
field.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8111723 
PMCID: PMC7692863
PMID: 33158054 

