
1. Life Sci. 2021 Jan 1;264:118716. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.118716. Epub 2020 Nov 4.

The immuno-oncological implications of insulin.

van Niekerk G(1), Dalgleish AG(2), Joubert F(3), Joubert A(4), Engelbrecht AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch,
South Africa. Electronic address: gustavvn@sun.ac.za.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, St George's University of
London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology, Centre for
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South
Africa.
(4)Department of Physiology, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(5)Department of Physiological Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch,
South Africa.

Emerging evidence has implicated insulin in regulating the phenotypes of various 
immune cells through canonical downstream signalling effectors of insulin,
namely, the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. Notably, these signalling components also
exhibit crosstalk with other immune signalling pathways, such as the JAK/STAT
pathway (activated by cytokines and growth factors), and, importantly, are also
negatively regulated by the immune checkpoint blockers (ICBs), PD-1 and CTLA-4.
Here, we point out recent findings, suggesting that insulin may promote a
pro-inflammatory phenotype with potential implications on ICB therapy. As an
example, the contemporary paradigm holds that, while T cell receptor recognition 
of distinct MHC-expressed epitopes ensures specificity, co-activation of CD28
along with signal inputs form various cytokines and insulin operates to
'fine-tune' the immune response via PI3K and other downstream signalling
molecules. These considerations highlight the urgent need for focused
investigations into the role of insulin in regulating immune cell function in the
context of ICB therapies.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.118716 
PMID: 33159956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

