
1. Ned Tijdschr Tandheelkd. 2020 Oct;127(10):557-560. doi:
10.5177/ntvt.2020.10.20044.

[The relation between halitosis and saliva].

[Article in Dutch; Abstract available in Dutch from the publisher]

Laine ML.

Halitosis (bad breath) is caused by a number of volatiles originating, in most
cases, in the oral cavity (intra-oral halitosis). These unpleasant smelling gases
are volatile sulphur compounds such as hydrogen sulphide, methyl mercaptan and
dimethyl sulphide secreted as a result of bacterial metabolism. Bacteria on the
tongue dorsum, as well as oral pathologies such as gingivitis and periodontitis, 
are the main causes of intra-oral halitosis. Saliva has a number of functions
that can affect intra-oral halitosis, such as mechanical cleaning, moistening of 
the oral cavity and antibacterial properties. Very low secretion of saliva
(hyposalivation) can affect intra-oral halitosis.

Publisher: Halitose (slechte ademgeur) wordt veroorzaakt door een aantal
vluchtige stoffen die in meeste gevallen afkomstig zijn uit de mondholte
(intraorale halitose). Deze onaangenaam ruikende gassen zijn vluchtige
zwavelverbindingen zoals waterstofsulfide, methylmercaptaan en dimethylsulfide en
worden uitgescheiden als resultaat van bacterieel metabolisme. Bacteriën op de
tongrug maar ook orale pathologieën zoals gingivitis en parodontitis, zijn
hoofdzakelijk de oorzaak van intraorale halitose. Speeksel heeft een aantal
functies die intraorale halitose kunnen beïnvloeden, zoals mechanische reiniging,
bevochtiging van de mond en antibacteriële eigenschappen. Een zeer lage
speekselsecretie (hyposalivatie) kan intraorale halitose beïnvloeden.
DOI: 10.5177/ntvt.2020.10.20044 
PMID: 33156297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

