
1. Libyan J Med. 2021 Dec;16(1):1845444. doi: 10.1080/19932820.2020.1845444.

Phylogenetic Group B2 Expressed Significant Biofilm Formation among Drug
Resistant Uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Javed S(1), Mirani ZA(2), Pirzada ZA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Karachi , Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research Laboratories Complex , 
Karachi, Pakistan.

Biofilm is an important virulent marker attributed to the development of urinary 
tract infections (UTIs) by uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC). Drug-resistant and
biofilm-producing UPEC are highly problematic causing catheter-associated or
recurrent UTIs with significant morbidity and mortality. The aim of the current
study was to investigate the prevalence of biofilm formation and phylogenetic
groups in drug-resistant UPEC to predict their ability to cause disease. This
prospective study was conducted at the Department of Microbiology, University of 
Karachi from January to June 2019. A total of 50 highly drug-resistant UPEC were 
selected for this study. UPEC isolates were screened to form biofilm by Congo-red
agar (CRA) and microtiter plate (MTP) technique. The representative
biofilm-producing isolates were analysed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
monitoring. Phylogenetic analysis was done by PCR method based on two preserved
genes; chuA, yjaA and TspE4-C2 DNA fragment. On CRA 34 (68%) UPEC were slime
producers, while on MTP 20 (40%) were strong biofilm producers, 19 (38%) moderate
and 11 (22%) were low to negligible biofilm producers. Molecular typing confirmed
that phylogenetic group B2 was prevalent in drug resistant UPEC strains.
Pathogenic strains belonged to phylogenetic group B2 and D were found to have
greater biofilm forming ability as compare to non-pathogenic commensal strains
that belonged to phylogenetic group A. Our results indicate that biofilm
formation vary in drug resistant UPEC belonged to different phylogenetic groups. 
This study indicates possible link between in vitro biofilm formation and
phylogenetic groups of UPEC, therefore this knowledge might be helpful to predict
the pathogenic potential of UPEC and help design strategies for controlling UTIs.

DOI: 10.1080/19932820.2020.1845444 
PMCID: PMC7671661
PMID: 33170767 

