
1. HLA. 2021 Feb;97(2):112-126. doi: 10.1111/tan.14134. Epub 2021 Jan 11.

Distributions of HLA-A, -B, and -DRB1 alleles typed by amplicon-based next
generation sequencing in Korean volunteer donors for unrelated hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation.

Baek IC(1), Choi EJ(1), Shin DH(1), Kim HJ(1), Choi H(2), Kim TG(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoietic Stem Cell Bank, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, South Korea.

HLA genes play a pivotal role for successful hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT). There is an increasing need for sophisticated screening
of donor HLA genotypes for unrelated HSCT. Next generation sequencing (NGS) has
emerged as an alternative for classical Sanger sequence for HLA typing. In this
study, HLA-A, -B, and -DRB1 alleles were genotyped at the allelic (6-digit) level
using MiSeqDx in 26,202 volunteers from the Korean Network for Organ Sharing.
Exon 2 and 3 of HLA-A and -B and exon 2 of HLA-DRB1 were amplified by polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) and each allele was determined by matching the targeted
exons and the reference sequence consisting of the IPD-IMGT/HLA Database. Seventy
alleles of HLA-A, 102 alleles of HLA-B, and 69 alleles of HLA-DRB1 were
identified. According to common and well-documented catalogs, 34 alleles in
HLA-A, 61 in HLA-B, and 45 in HLA-DRB1 locus were common alleles, and 12, 14, and
11 kinds, were well-documented alleles, respectively. Thirteen novel alleles
including 3 alleles in HLA-A, 8 alleles in HLA-B, and 2 alleles in HLA-DRB1 loci 
were found. Ten haplotypes with a frequency of more than 1.0% accounted for 22.4%
of the total haplotype frequencies. Cis/trans ambiguities of HLA-A and -B loci by
combination of exons 2 and 3 were analyzed to be 0.17% of 3 and 3.95% of 22
genotypes, respectively. This information on rare and novel alleles found by
accurate HLA typing with NGS may be helpful for unrelated HSCT among Koreans.

Â© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tan.14134 
PMID: 33179442 

