
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Oct 16;11:575154. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.575154. eCollection
2020.

C2 IgM Natural Antibody Enhances Inflammation and Its Use in the Recombinant
Single Chain Antibody-Fused Complement Inhibitor C2-Crry to Target Therapeutics
to Joints Attenuates Arthritis in Mice.

Banda NK(1), Tomlinson S(2), Scheinman RI(3), Ho N(1)(3), Ramirez JR(1), Mehta
G(1), Wang G(3), Vu VP(3), Simberg D(3), Kulik L(1), Holers VM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC, United States.
(3)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States.

Natural IgM antibodies (NAbs) have been shown to recognize injury-associated
neoepitopes and to initiate pathogenic complement activation. The NAb termed C2
binds to a subset of phospholipids displayed on injured cells, and its role(s) in
arthritis, as well as the potential therapeutic benefit of a C2 NAb-derived
ScFv-containing protein fused to a complement inhibitor, complement
receptor-related y (Crry), on joint inflammation are unknown. Our first objective
was to functionally test mAb C2 binding to apoptotic cells from the joint and
also evaluate its inflammation enhancing capacity in collagen antibody-induced
arthritis (CAIA). The second objective was to generate and test the complement
inhibitory capacity of C2-Crry fusion protein in the collagen-induced arthritis
(CIA) model. The third objective was to demonstrate in vivo targeting of C2-Crry 
to damaged joints in mice with arthritis. The effect of C2-NAb on CAIA in C57BL/6
mice was examined by inducing a suboptimal disease. The inhibitory effect of
C2-Crry in DBA/1J mice with CIA was determined by injecting 2x per week with a
single dose of 0.250 mg/mouse. Clinical disease activity (CDA) was examined, and 
knee joints were fixed for analysis of histopathology, C3 deposition, and
macrophage infiltration. In mice with suboptimal CAIA, at day 10 there was a
significant (p < 0.017) 74% increase in the CDA in mice treated with C2 NAb,
compared to mice treated with F632 control NAb. In mice with CIA, at day 35 there
was a significant 39% (p < 0.042) decrease in the CDA in mice treated with
C2-Crry. Total scores for histopathology were also 50% decreased (p < 0.0005) in 
CIA mice treated with C2-Crry. C3 deposition was significantly decreased in the
synovium (44%; p < 0.026) and on the surface of cartilage (42%; p < 0.008) in
mice treated with C2-Crry compared with PBS treated CIA mice. Furthermore,
C2-Crry specifically bound to apoptotic fibroblast-like synoviocytes in vitro,
and also localized in the knee joints of arthritic mice as analyzed by in vivo
imaging. In summary, NAb C2 enhanced arthritis-related injury, and targeted
delivery of C2-Crry to inflamed joints demonstrated disease modifying activity in
a mouse model of human inflammatory arthritis.

Copyright Â© 2020 Banda, Tomlinson, Scheinman, Ho, Ramirez, Mehta, Wang, Vu,
Simberg, Kulik and Holers.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.575154 
PMCID: PMC7596757
PMID: 33178202 

