
1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2020 Nov 10;9(11). pii: E794. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics9110794.

Effects of Labrador Tea, Peppermint, and Winter Savory Essential Oils on
Fusobacterium nucleatum.

Ben Lagha A(1), Vaillancourt K(1), Maquera Huacho P(1), Grenier D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oral Ecology Research Group, Faculty of Dentistry, Université Laval, Québec
City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada.

Bad breath or halitosis is an oral condition caused by volatile sulfur compounds 
(VSC) produced by bacteria found in the dental and tongue biofilms. Fusobacterium
nucleatum is a Gram-negative anaerobic bacterium that has been strongly
associated with halitosis. In this study, essential oils (EO) from three plants, 
Labrador tea (Rhododendron groenlandicum [Oeder] Kron & Judd), peppermint (Mentha
x piperita L.), and winter savory (Satureja montana L.), were investigated for
their effects on growth, biofilm formation and killing, and VSC production by F. 
nucleatum. Moreover, their biocompatibility with oral keratinocytes was
investigated. Using a broth microdilution assay, winter savory EO and to a lesser
extent Labrador tea and peppermint EO showed antibacterial activity against F.
nucleatum. A treatment of pre-formed biofilms of F. nucleatum with EO also
significantly decreased bacterial viability as determined by a luminescence assay
monitoring adenosine triphosphate production. The EO were found to permeabilize
the bacterial cell membrane, suggesting that it represents the target of the
tested EO. The three EO under investigation were able to dose-dependently reduce 
VSC production by F. nucleatum. Lastly, no significant loss of cell viability was
observed when oral keratinocytes were treated with the EO at concentrations
effective against F. nucleatum. This study supports the potential of Labrador
tea, peppermint, and winter savory EO as promising agents to control halitosis
and promote oral health.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics9110794 
PMCID: PMC7697736
PMID: 33182686 

