
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2021 Jan 15;87(3). pii: e02457-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02457-20. Print 2021 Jan 15.

Differential Effects of Homologous Transcriptional Regulators NicR2A, NicR2B1,
and NicR2B2 and Endogenous Ectopic Strong Promoters on Nicotine Metabolism in
Pseudomonas sp. Strain JY-Q.

Huang C(1), Shan L(1), Chen Z(1), He Z(1), Li J(1), Yang Y(2), Shu M(3), Pan
F(3), Jiao Y(4), Zhang F(5), Linhardt RJ(5), Zhong W(6).

Author information: 
(1)College of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Zhejiang University of
Technology, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Technology Center, China Tobacco Zhejiang Industrial Co., Ltd., Hangzhou,
China Yangy@zjtobacco.com whzhong@zjut.edu.cn.
(3)Technology Center, China Tobacco Zhejiang Industrial Co., Ltd., Hangzhou,
China.
(4)Technology Center, Hangzhou Liqun Environmental Protection Paper Co., Ltd.,
Hangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Center for Biotechnology
and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, 
USA.
(6)College of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Zhejiang University of
Technology, Hangzhou, China Yangy@zjtobacco.com whzhong@zjut.edu.cn.

Nicotine is a toxic environmental pollutant that widely exists in tobacco wastes.
As a natural nicotine-degrading strain, Pseudomonas sp. strain JY-Q still has
difficulties degrading high concentrations of nicotine. In this study, we
investigated the effect of two homologous transcriptional regulators and
endogenous ectopic strong promoters on the efficiency of nicotine degradation.
Comparative genomics analysis showed that two homologous transcriptional
regulators, namely, NicR2A and NicR2Bs (NicR2B1 plus NicR2B2), can repress
nicotine degradation gene expression. When both nicR2A and nicR2Bs were deleted, 
the resulting mutant JY-Q ΔnicR2A ΔnicR2B1 ΔnicR2B2 (QΔABs) exhibits a 17% higher
nicotine degradation efficiency than wild-type JY-Q. Transcriptome sequencing
(RNA-seq) analysis showed that the transcription levels (fragments per kilobase
per million [FPKM] value) of six genes were higher than those of the other genes 
in JY-Q. Based on the genetic organization of these genes, three putative
promoters, PRS28250 , PRS09985 , and PRS24685 , were identified. Their promoter
activities were evaluated by comparing their expression levels using reverse
transcriptase quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). We found that the transcription levels 
of RS28250, RS09985, and RS24685 were respectively 16.8, 2.6, and 1.6 times
higher than that of hspB2, encoding 6-hydroxy-3-succinylpyridine hydroxylase,
which is involved in nicotine degradation. Thus, two strong endogenous promoters,
namely, PRS28250 and PRS09985 , were selected to replace the original promoters
of nic2 gene clusters. The effect of the endogenous ectopic promoter was also
related to the position of target gene clusters. When the promoter PRS28250
replaced the promoter of hspB2, the resultant mutant QΔABs-ΔPhspB2 ::PRS28250
exhibited nicotine-degrading efficiency 69% higher than that of JY-Q. This
research suggests a feasible strategy to enhance strains' capacity for nicotine
degradation by removal of repressing regulatory proteins and replacing the target
promoter with strong endogenous ectopic promoters.IMPORTANCE This study evaluated
the differential effects of homologous NicR2A and NicR2Bs and endogenous ectopic 
strong promoters on nicotine metabolism in Pseudomonas sp. strain JY-Q. Based on 
our differential analysis, a feasible strategy is presented to modify wild-type
(WT) strain JY-Q by removing repressing regulatory proteins NicR2A and NicR2Bs
and replacing the target promoter with strong endogenous ectopic promoters. The
resulting mutants exhibited high tolerance and degradation of nicotine. These
findings should be beneficial for improving the pollutant-degrading capacity of
natural strains through genomic modification.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02457-20 
PMCID: PMC7848913 [Available on 2021-07-15]
PMID: 33187996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

