
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Oct 19;11:573406. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.573406. eCollection
2020.

Different Human Immune Lineage Compositions Are Generated in Non-Conditioned
NBSGW Mice Depending on HSPC Source.

Hess NJ(1), Lindner PN(2), Vazquez J(2), Grindel S(3), Hudson AW(4), Stanic
AK(2), Ikeda A(3), Hematti P(5), Gumperz JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, United
States.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, United States.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, United States.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, WI, United States.
(5)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, United
States.

NBSGW mice are highly immunodeficient and carry a hypomorphic mutation in the
c-kit gene, providing a host environment that supports robust human hematopoietic
expansion without pre-conditioning. These mice thus provide a model to
investigate human hematopoietic engraftment in the absence of
conditioning-associated damage. We compared transplantation of human CD34+ HSPCs 
purified from three different sources: umbilical cord blood, adult bone marrow,
and adult G-CSF mobilized peripheral blood. HSPCs from mobilized peripheral blood
were significantly more efficient (as a function of starting HSPC dose) than
either cord blood or bone marrow HSPCs at generating high levels of human
chimerism in the murine blood and bone marrow by 12 weeks post-transplantation.
While T cells do not develop in this model due to thymic atrophy, all three HSPC 
sources generated a human compartment that included B lymphocytic, myeloid, and
granulocytic lineages. However, the proportions of these lineages varied
significantly according to HSPC source. Mobilized blood HSPCs produced a
strikingly higher proportion of granulocyte lineage cells (~35% as compared to
~5%), whereas bone marrow HSPC output was dominated by B lymphocytic cells, and
cord blood HSPC output was enriched for myeloid lineages. Following
transplantation, all three HSPC sources showed a shift in the CD34+ subset
towards CD45RA+ progenitors along with a complete loss of the CD45RA-CD49f+
long-term HSC subpopulation, suggesting this model promotes mainly short-term HSC
activity. Mice transplanted with cord blood HSPCs maintained a diversified human 
immune compartment for at least 36 weeks after the primary transplant, although
mice given adult bone marrow HSPCs had lost diversity and contained only myeloid 
cells by this time point. Finally, to assess the impact of non-HSPCs on
transplantation outcome, we also tested mice transplanted with total or T
cell-depleted adult bone marrow mononuclear cells. Total bone marrow mononuclear 
cell transplants produced significantly lower human chimerism compared to
purified HSPCs, and T-depletion rescued B cell levels but not other lineages.
Together these results reveal marked differences in engraftment efficiency and
lineage commitment according to HSPC source and suggest that T cells and other
non-HSPC populations affect lineage output even in the absence of
conditioning-associated inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2020 Hess, Lindner, Vazquez, Grindel, Hudson, Stanic, Ikeda, Hematti 
and Gumperz.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.573406 
PMCID: PMC7604455
PMID: 33193358 

