
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Oct 29;11:579844. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.579844.
eCollection 2020.

Eat1-Like Alcohol Acyl Transferases From Yeasts Have High Alcoholysis and
Thiolysis Activity.

Patinios C(1)(2), Lanza L(1), Corino I(1), Franssen MCR(3), Van der Oost J(1),
Weusthuis RA(2), Kengen SWM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Agrotechnology and Food Sciences,
Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Bioprocess Engineering, Department of Agrotechnology and Food
Sciences, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, Netherlands.
(3)Laboratory of Organic Chemistry, Department of Agrotechnology and Food
Sciences, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, Netherlands.

Esters are important flavor and fragrance compounds that are present in many food
and beverage products. Many of these esters are produced by yeasts and bacteria
during fermentation. While ester production in yeasts through the alcohol acyl
transferase reaction has been thoroughly investigated, ester production through
alcoholysis has been completely neglected. Here, we further analyze the catalytic
capacity of the yeast Eat1 enzyme and demonstrate that it also has alcoholysis
and thiolysis activities. Eat1 can perform alcoholysis in an aqueous environment 
in vitro, accepting a wide range of alcohols (C2-C10) but only a small range of
acyl donors (C2-C4). We show that alcoholysis occurs in vivo in several Crabtree 
negative yeast species but also in engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains
that overexpress Eat1 homologs. The alcoholysis activity of Eat1 was also used to
upgrade ethyl esters to butyl esters in vivo by overexpressing Eat1 in
Clostridium beijerinckii. Approximately 17 mM of butyl acetate and 0.3 mM of
butyl butyrate could be produced following our approach. Remarkably, the in vitro
alcoholysis activity is 445 times higher than the previously described alcohol
acyl transferase activity. Thus, alcoholysis is likely to affect the ester
generation, both quantitatively and qualitatively, in food and beverage
production processes. Moreover, mastering the alcoholysis activity of Eat1 may
give rise to the production of novel food and beverage products.

Copyright Â© 2020 Patinios, Lanza, Corino, Franssen, Van der Oost, Weusthuis and
Kengen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.579844 
PMCID: PMC7658179
PMID: 33193208 

