
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Oct 20;11:581301. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.581301. eCollection
2020.

Natural Killer T-Cell Agonist α-Galactosylceramide and PD-1 Blockade Synergize to
Reduce Tumor Development in a Preclinical Model of Colon Cancer.

Wang Y(1), Bhave MS(1), Yagita H(2), Cardell SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Immunology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku,
Japan.

Murine and human invariant natural killer T (iNKT) lymphocytes are activated by
α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) presented on CD1d. α-GalCer was first described
as a lipid that had strong anti-metastatic effects in a mouse melanoma model, and
it has subsequently been shown to induce efficient iNKT cell dependent tumor
immunity in several tumor models. We have shown that α-GalCer treatment leads to 
a weak reduction of polyp burden in the autochthonous ApcMin/+ mouse model for
human colon cancer, however this treatment resulted in upregulation of the
inhibitory receptor PD-1 on iNKT cells. While anti-PD-1 treatment can prevent
immune-suppression in other cancer types, human colon cancer is generally
resistant to this treatment. Here we have used the ApcMin/+ model to investigate 
whether a combined treatment with α-GalCer and PD-1 blockade results in improved 
effects on polyp development. We find that PD-1 expression was high on T cells in
polyps and lamina propria (LP) of ApcMin/+ mice compared to polyp free Apc+/+
littermates. Anti-PD-1 treatment alone promoted Tbet expression in iNKT cells and
CD4 T cells, but did not significantly reduce polyp numbers. However, the
combined treatment with anti-PD-1 and α-GalCer had synergistic effects, resulting
in highly significant reduction of polyp numbers in the small and large
intestine. Addition of PD-1 blockade to α-GalCer treatment prevented loss of iNKT
cells that were skewed towards a TH1-like iNKT1 phenotype specifically in polyps.
It also resulted in TH1 skewing and increased granzyme B expression of CD4 T
cells. Taken together this demonstrates that a combination of immune stimulation 
targeting iNKT cells and checkpoint blockade may be a promising approach to
develop for improved tumor immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2020 Wang, Bhave, Yagita and Cardell.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.581301 
PMCID: PMC7606378
PMID: 33193386 

