
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Nov 14;8(11). pii: E1784. doi:
10.3390/microorganisms8111784.

Genetic Traces of the Francisella tularensis Colonization of Spain, 1998-2020.

Myrtennäs K(1), Escudero R(2), Zaballos Á(2), González-Martín-Niño R(2),
Gyuranecz M(3), Johansson A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of CBRN Defence and Security, Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI), 
90182 Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Centro Nacional de Microbiología, 28220 Madrid,
Spain.
(3)Institute for Veterinary Medical Research, Centre for Agricultural Research,
Hungária körút 21, 1143 Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.

More than 1000 humans have acquired the febrile disease tularemia in Spain since 
the first notification of human cases in 1997. We here aimed to study the recent 
molecular evolution of the causative bacterium Francisella tularensis during
disease establishment in Spain. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
variable-number tandem repeats (VNTRs) were analyzed in whole-genome sequences
(WGS) of F. tularensis. Short-read WGS data for 20 F. tularensis strains from
humans infected in the periods 2014-2015 and 2018-2020 in Spain were generated.
These data were combined with WGS data of 25 Spanish strains from 1998 to 2008
and two reference strains. Capillary electrophoresis data of VNTR genetic regions
were generated and compared with the WGS data for the 11 strains from 2014 to
2015. Evolutionary relationships among strains were analyzed by phylogenetic
methods. We identified 117 informative SNPs in a 1,577,289-nucleotide WGS
alignment of 47 F. tularensis genomes. Forty-five strains from Spain formed a
star-like SNP phylogeny with six branches emerging from a basal common node. The 
most recently evolved genomes formed four additional star-like structures that
were derived from four branches of the basal common node. VNTR copy number
variation was detected in two out of 10 VNTR regions examined. Genetic clustering
of strains by VNTRs agreed with the clustering by SNPs. The SNP data provided
higher resolution among strains than the VNTRs data in all but one cases. There
was an excellent correlation between VNTR marker sizing by capillary
electrophoresis and prediction from WGS data. The genetic data strongly support
that tularemia, indeed, emerged recently in Spain. Distinct genetic patterns of
local F. tularensis population expansions imply that the pathogen has colonized a
previously disease-free geographical area. We also found that genome-wide SNPs
provide higher genetic resolution among F. tularensis genomes than the use of
VNTRs, and that VNTR copy numbers can be accurately predicted using short-read
WGS data.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8111784 
PMCID: PMC7696290
PMID: 33202547 

