
1. J Pathog. 2020 Oct 28;2020:7938149. doi: 10.1155/2020/7938149. eCollection 2020.

Toxin Production and Resistance of Staphylococcus Species Isolated from Fermented
Artisanal Dairy Products in Benin.

Tohoyessou MG(1), Mousse W(1), Sina H(1), Kona F(2), Azanghadji T(1), Guessennd
N(2), Baba-Moussa F(3), Dadie T(4), Adjanohoun A(5), Baba-Moussa L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Biology and Typing Molecular in Microbiology, Faculty of Science
and Technology, University of Abomey-Calavi, 05 BP 1604, Cotonou, Benin.
(2)Antibiotics, Natural Substances and Surveillance of Resistance of
Microorganisms to Anti-Infective Unit (ASSURMI), Institute Pasteur of Ivory
Coast, 01 BP 490, Abidjan 01, Côte d'Ivoire.
(3)Laboratory of Microbiology and Food Technology, Faculty of Science and
Technology, University of Abomey-Calavi, ISBA-Champ de Foire, 01 BP 526, Cotonou,
Benin.
(4)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Food Microbiology, University Nangui Abrogoua,
02 B.P. 801, Abidjan 02, Côte d'Ivoire.
(5)Benin National Institute of Agricultural Research, Cotonou, Benin.

Staphylococcus species are considered as one of the major pathogens causing
outbreaks of food poisoning. The aim of this work was to assess the toxinogenic
and antibiotic susceptibility profiles of the strains of Staphylococcus spp
isolated from three types of fermented dairy products (yoghourt, millet dêguê,
and couscous dêguê). The isolation of the Staphylococcus strains was performed on
selective media, and their identification was done using biochemical and
molecular methods. The susceptibility at 15 antibiotics tested was assessed using
the disc diffusion method. The immunodiffusion method was used to evaluate the
toxin (luk-E/D, luk-S/F, ETA, and ETB) production. Biofilm formation was
qualitatively researched on microplates. Less than half (42.77%) of the collected
samples were contaminated with Staphylococcus spp. The yoghourt and millet dêguê 
samples collected in the afternoon were more contaminated than those collected in
the morning. The S. aureus, S. capitis, and S. xylosus strains, respectively,
were the most present. S. aureus was the only coagulase-positive species
identified in our samples. The highest resistance to antibiotics was observed
with penicillin (100%) irrespective of the nature of the sample. S. aureus
strains were highly (71.4%) resistant to methicillin. The S. aureus strains were 
the most biofilm-forming (27.6%), followed by S. capitis strains. Panton and
Valentine's leukocidin (luk-S/F) was produced by only S. aureus strains at a rate
of 8.33%. Only coagulase-negative Staphylococcus (CNS) produced Luk-E/D. The high
rates of Staphylococci contamination indicate bad hygiene quality during the
production and distribution of dairy products. It is, therefore, necessary to
improve the quality of fermented milk products.

Copyright © 2020 Majoie Géroxie Tohoyessou et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/7938149 
PMCID: PMC7649661
PMID: 33204534 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no conflicts of
interest in the publication of this manuscript.

