
1. Lancet. 2020 Nov 21;396(10263):1653-1662. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32411-9.

Oxygenated versus standard cold perfusion preservation in kidney transplantation 
(COMPARE): a randomised, double-blind, paired, phase 3 trial.

Jochmans I(1), Brat A(2), Davies L(3), Hofker HS(2), van de Leemkolk FEM(3),
Leuvenink HGD(2), Knight SR(3), Pirenne J(4), Ploeg RJ(5); COMPARE Trial
Collaboration and Consortium for Organ Preservation in Europe (COPE).

Collaborators: Abramowicz D, Banga N, Bemelman FJ, Betjes MG, Burns R, Chiocchia 
V, Christiaans MH, Darius T, de Jonge J, de Vries AP, Detry O, Hilbrands LB,
Hofker HS, Hoksbergen AW, Huurman VA, Idu MM, Jacobs-Tulleneers-Thevissen D,
Jochmans I, Kaisar M, Kanaan N, Kimenai D, Kuypers D, Le Moine A, Marshall C,
Meurisse N, Mikhalski D, Moers C, Monbaliu D, Nijboer WN, Nurmohamed SA,
O'Callaghan J, Papalois V, Pipeleers L, Poyck PP, Quiroga I, Randon C, Schurink
GW, Seelen M, Szabo L, Toorop RJ, van de Poll MC, van der Jagt MF, Van Laecke S, 
van Zuilen AD, Weekers L, Ysebaert D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Transplantation, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium; Department of Abdominal Transplant Surgery, University Hospitals
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: ina.jochmans@uzleuven.be.
(2)Department of Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands.
(3)Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Transplantation, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium; Department of Abdominal Transplant Surgery, University Hospitals
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands; Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK; NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK; Transplant
Center, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2021 Dec 19;396(10267):1978.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2020 Nov 21;396(10263):1609-1611.

BACKGROUND: Deceased donor kidneys are preserved in cold hypoxic conditions.
Providing oxygen during preservation might improve post-transplant outcomes,
particularly for kidneys subjected to greater degrees of preservation injury.
This study aimed to investigate whether supplemental oxygen during hypothermic
machine perfusion (HMP) could improve the outcome of kidneys donated after
circulatory death.
METHODS: This randomised, double-blind, paired, phase 3 trial was done in 19
European transplant centres. Kidney pairs from donors aged 50 years or older,
donated after circulatory death, were eligible if both kidneys were transplanted 
into two different recipients. One kidney from each donor was randomly assigned
using permuted blocks to oxygenated hypothermic machine perfusion (HMPO2), the
other to HMP without oxygenation. Perfusion was maintained from organ retrieval
to implantation. The primary outcome was 12-month estimated glomerular filtration
rate (eGFR) using the Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration equation 
in pairs of donated kidneys in which both transplanted kidneys were functioning
at the end of follow-up. Safety outcomes were reported for all transplanted
kidneys. Intention-to-treat analyses were done. This trial is registered with the
ISRCTN Registry, ISRCTN32967929, and is now closed.
FINDINGS: Between March 15, 2015, and April 11, 2017, 197 kidney pairs were
randomised with 106 pairs transplanted into eligible recipients. 23 kidney pairs 
were excluded from the primary analysis because of kidney failure or patient
death. Mean eGFR at 12 months was 50·5 mL/min per 1·73 m2 (SD 19·3) in the HMPO2 
group versus 46·7 mL/min per 1·73m2 (17·1) in HMP (mean difference 3·7 mL/min per
1·73m2, 95% CI -1·0 to 8·4; p=0·12). Fewer severe complications (Clavien-Dindo
grade IIIb or more) were reported in the HMPO2 group (46 of 417, 11%, 95% CI 8%
to 14%) than in the HMP group (76 of 474, 16%, 13% to 20%; p=0·032). Graft
failure was lower with HMPO2 (three [3%] of 106) compared with HMP (11 [10%] of
106; hazard ratio 0·27, 95% CI 0·07 to 0·95; p=0·028).
INTERPRETATION: HMPO2 of kidneys donated after circulatory death is safe and
reduces post-transplant complications (grade IIIb or more). The 12-month
difference in eGFR between the HMPO2 and HMP groups was not significant when both
kidneys from the same donor were still functioning 1-year post-transplant, but
potential beneficial effects of HMPO2 were suggested by analysis of secondary
outcomes.
FUNDING: European Commission 7th Framework Programme.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32411-9 
PMID: 33220737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

