
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2020 Nov 26. doi: 10.1002/JLB.3A0220-097R. [Epub ahead of print]

P2Y12 antagonism results in altered interactions between platelets and regulatory
T cells during sepsis.

Albayati S(1), Vemulapalli H(1), Tsygankov AY(1)(2), Liverani E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sol Sherry Thrombosis Research Center, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple
University, 3420 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, PA, 19140, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology Temple University School of
Medicine, Temple University Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Sepsis is a complex clinical condition resulting from a serious bloodstream
infection. With mortality rates as high as 50%, improved treatments are needed.
Regulatory T cells (Tregs), a subset of T lymphocytes, promote the resolution of 
inflammation. Septic patients have elevated levels of circulating Tregs.
Platelets influence the proliferation and activation of Tregs in vitro. However, 
modulating platelet-Tregs interaction during sepsis may restraing Treg
proliferation, leading to the restoration of immunologic homeostasis. P2Y12 is a 
purinergic receptor present on platelets and T lymphocytes. Blocking P2Y12
improves the outcome of sepsis. We investigated whether blocking P2Y12 alters
platelet-Treg interaction in vivo. We used the murine model of sepsis, cecal
ligation, and puncture (CLP) and we blocked P2Y12 using the P2Y12 antagonist,
clopidogrel. Twenty-four hours after surgery, we measured Treg population sizes
in the spleens of the Sham, CLP, and CLP + clopidogrel groups. We investigated
the effect of blocking P2Y12 in vitro using cocultures of human platelets and T
cells with or without anti-CD3/CD28. P2Y12 was blocked using AR-C69931MX. Treg
population sizes were reduced in the septic mice treated with clopidogrel
compared with untreated septic mice. Aggregation of platelets and CD4+ T cells
was reduced in treated CLP mice compared with untreated CLP mice. P2Y12
antagonism changes how platelets influence T cells in vitro, depending on T-cell 
activation. In conclusion, blockade of the P2Y12 signaling pathway restrains Treg
proliferation in vivo and in vitro. Targeting platelets to control Treg
proliferation and activity may be a promising strategy for treating sepsis.

©2020 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/JLB.3A0220-097R 
PMID: 33242353 

