
1. J Virol. 2020 Dec 2. pii: JVI.01837-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01837-20. [Epub ahead of
print]

Identification of HLA-A*02:01-restricted candidate epitopes derived from the
non-structural polyprotein 1a of SARS-CoV-2 that may be natural targets of CD8+ T
cell recognition in vivo.

Takagi A(1), Matsui M(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Technology, Faculty of Health and Medical Care, Saitama
Medical University, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka-city, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Saitama Medical University,
38 Morohongo, Moroyama-cho, Iruma-gun, Saitama 350-0495, Japan
mmatsui@saitama-med.ac.jp.

COVID-19 vaccines are being rapidly developed and human trials are underway.
Almost all of these vaccines have been designed to induce antibodies targeting
spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 in expectation of neutralizing activities. However,
non-neutralizing antibodies are at risk of causing antibody-dependent
enhancement. Further, the longevity of SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies is very
short. Therefore, in addition to antibody-induced vaccines, novel vaccines on the
basis of SARS-CoV-2-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) should be considered 
in the vaccine development. Here, we attempted to identify HLA-A*02:01-restricted
CTL epitopes derived from the non-structural polyprotein 1a of SARS-CoV-2.
Eighty-two peptides were firstly predicted as epitope candidates on
bioinformatics. Fifty-four in 82 peptides showed high or medium binding
affinities to HLA-A*02:01. HLA-A*02:01 transgenic mice were then immunized with
each of the 54 peptides encapsulated into liposomes. The intracellular cytokine
staining assay revealed that 18 out of 54 peptides were CTL epitopes because of
the induction of IFN-γ-producing CD8+ T cells. In the 18 peptides, 10 peptides
were chosen for the following analyses because of their high responses. To
identify dominant CTL epitopes, mice were immunized with liposomes containing the
mixture of the 10 peptides. Some peptides were shown to be statistically
predominant over the other peptides. Surprisingly, all mice immunized with the
liposomal 10 peptide mixture did not show the same reaction pattern to the 10
peptides. There were three response patterns, suggesting the existence of an
immunodominance hierarchy following peptide vaccination, which may provide us
more variations in the epitope selection for designing CTL-based COVID-19
vaccines.IMPORTANCE For the development of vaccines based on SARS-CoV-2-specific 
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), we attempted to identify HLA-A*02:01-restricted
CTL epitopes derived from the non-structural polyprotein 1a of SARS-CoV-2. Out of
82 peptides predicted on bioinformatics, 54 peptides showed good binding
affinities to HLA-A*02:01. Using HLA-A*02:01 transgenic mice, 18 in 54 peptides
were found to be CTL epitopes in the intracellular cytokine staining assay. Out
of 18 peptides, 10 peptides were chosen for the following analyses because of
their high responses. To identify dominant epitopes, mice were immunized with
liposomes containing the mixture of the 10 peptides. Some peptides were shown to 
be statistically predominant. Surprisingly, all immunized mice did not show the
same reaction pattern to the 10 peptides. There were three reaction patterns,
suggesting the existence of an immunodominance hierarchy following peptide
vaccination, which may provide us more variations in the epitope selection for
designing CTL-based COVID-19 vaccines.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01837-20 
PMID: 33268522 

