
1. Immunology. 2021 Apr;162(4):389-404. doi: 10.1111/imm.13289. Epub 2020 Dec 20.

The combinatorial diversity of KIR and HLA class I allotypes in Peninsular
Malaysia.

Tao S(1)(2), Kichula KM(1), Harrison GF(1), Farias TDJ(1), Palmer WH(1), Leaton
LA(1), Hajar CGN(3), Zefarina Z(4), Edinur HA(3), Zhu F(2), Norman PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Informatics and Personalized Medicine, Department of
Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Blood Center of Zhejiang Province, Key Laboratory of Blood Safety Research of 
Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)School of Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Health Campus, Kelantan,
Malaysia.
(4)School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Health Campus,
Kelantan, Malaysia.

Killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs) interact with polymorphic human 
leucocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules, modulating natural killer (NK) cell
functions and affecting both the susceptibility and outcome of immune-mediated
diseases. The KIR locus is highly diverse in gene content, copy number and
allelic polymorphism within individuals and across geographical populations. To
analyse currently under-represented Asian and Pacific populations, we
investigated the combinatorial diversity of KIR and HLA class I in 92 unrelated
Malay and 75 Malaysian Chinese individuals from the Malay Peninsula. We
identified substantial allelic and structural diversity of the KIR locus in both 
populations and characterized novel variations at each analysis level. The Malay 
population is more diverse than Malay Chinese, likely representing a unique
history including admixture with immigrating populations spanning several
thousand years. Characterizing the Malay population are KIR haplotypes with large
structural variants present in 10% individuals, and KIR and HLA alleles
previously identified in Austronesian populations. Despite the differences in
ancestries, the proportion of HLA allotypes that serve as KIR ligands is similar 
in each population. The exception is a significantly reduced frequency of
interactions of KIR2DL1 with C2+ HLA-C in the Malaysian Chinese group, caused by 
the low frequency of C2+ HLA. One likely implication is a greater protection from
preeclampsia, a pregnancy disorder associated with KIR2DL1, which shows higher
incidence in the Malay than in the Malaysian Chinese. This first complete,
high-resolution, characterization of combinatorial diversity of KIR and HLA in
Malaysians will form a valuable reference for future clinical and population
studies.

Â© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.13289 
PMCID: PMC7968402 [Available on 2022-04-01]
PMID: 33283280 

