
1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2020 Nov 26;2020:6697638. doi:
10.1155/2020/6697638. eCollection 2020.

Effect of Sheng-Jiang Powder on Gut Microbiota in High-Fat Diet-Induced NAFLD.

Li J(1), Hu Q(1), Xiao-Yu D(1), Zhu L(1), Miao YF(1), Kang HX(1), Zhao XL(1), Yao
JQ(1), Long D(2), Tang WF(1), Wan MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, Sichuan Province, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Transplant Engineering and Immunology, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, Sichuan Province, China.

Background and Aims: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is an alarming
global health problem that is predicted to be the major cause of cirrhosis,
hepatocellular carcinoma, and liver transplantation by next decade. Gut
microbiota have been revealed playing an important role in the pathogenesis of
NAFLD. Sheng-Jiang Powder (SJP), an empirical Chinese medicine formula to treat
NAFLD, showed great hepatoprotective properties, but the impact on gut microbiota
has never been identified. Therefore, we performed this study to investigate the 
effect of SJP on gut microbiota in NAFLD mice.
Methods: NAFLD was induced by 12 weeks' high-fat diet (HFD) feeding. Mice were
treated with SJP/normal saline daily for 6 weeks. Blood samples were obtained for
serum biochemical indices and inflammatory cytokines measurement. Liver tissues
were obtained for pathological evaluation and oil red O staining. The expression 
of lipid metabolism-related genes was quantified by RT-PCR and Western blotting. 
Changes in gut microbiota composition were analyzed by the 16s rDNA sequencing
technique.
Results: HFD feeding induced significant increase in bodyweight and serum levels 
of TG, TC, ALT, and AST. The pathological examination revealed obvious hepatic
steatosis in HFD feeding mice. Coadministration of SJP effectively protected
against bodyweight increase and lipid accumulation in blood and liver. Increased 
expression of PPARγ mRNA was observed in HFD feeding mice, but a steady elevation
of PPARγ protein level was only found in SJP-treated mice. Meanwhile, the
expression of FASN was much higher in HFD feeding mice. Microbiome analysis
revealed obvious changes in gut microbiota composition among diverse groups. SJP 
treatment modulated the relative abundance of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)
producing bacteria, including norank-f-Erysipelotrichaceae and Roseburia.
Conclusions: SJP is efficient in attenuating HFD-induced NAFLD, and it might be
partly attributed to the regulation of gut microbiota.

Copyright © 2020 Juan Li et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/6697638 
PMCID: PMC7714571
PMID: 33293992 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest.

