
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Nov 10;11:566619. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.566619.
eCollection 2020.

Competitive Exclusion Prevents Colonization and Compartmentalization Reduces
Transmission of ESBL-Producing Escherichia coli in Broilers.

Dame-Korevaar A(1)(2), Kers JG(1)(3), van der Goot J(2), Velkers FC(1),
Ceccarelli D(2), Mevius DJ(2)(4), Stegeman A(1), Fischer EAJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Bacteriology and Epidemiology, Wageningen Bioveterinary
Research, Lelystad, Netherlands.
(3)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, Wageningen, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing bacteria are resistant to
extended-spectrum cephalosporins and are common in broilers. Interventions are
needed to reduce the prevalence of ESBL-producing bacteria in the broiler
production pyramid. This study investigated two different interventions. The
effect of a prolonged supply of competitive exclusion (CE) product and
compartmentalization on colonization and transmission, after challenge with a low
dose of ESBL-producing Escherichia coli, in broilers kept under semi-field
conditions, were examined. One-day-old broilers (Ross 308) (n = 400) were housed 
in four experimental rooms, subdivided in one seeder (S/C1)-pen and eight contact
(C2)-pens. In two rooms, CE product was supplied from day 0 to 7. At day 5,
seeder-broilers were inoculated with E. coli strain carrying bla CTX-M- 1 on
plasmid IncI1 (CTX-M-1-E. coli). Presence of CTX-M-1-E. coli was determined using
cloacal swabs (day 5-21 daily) and cecal samples (day 21). Time until
colonization and cecal excretion (log10 CFU/g) were analyzed using survival
analysis and linear regression. Transmission coefficients within and between pens
were estimated using maximum likelihood. The microbiota composition was assessed 
by 16S ribosomal RNA gene amplicon sequencing in cecal content of broilers on
days 5 and 21. None of the CE broilers was CTX-M-1-E. coli positive. In contrast,
in the untreated rooms 187/200 of the broilers were CTX-M-1-E. coli positive at
day 21. Broilers in C2-pens were colonized later than seeder-broilers (Time to
event Ratio 3.53, 95% CI 3.14 to 3.93). The transmission coefficient between pens
was lower than within pens (3.28 × 10-4 day-2, 95% CI 2.41 × 10-4 to 4.32 × 10-4 
vs. 6.12 × 10-2 day-2, 95% CI 4.78 × 10-2 to 7.64 × 10-2). The alpha diversity of
the cecal microbiota content was higher in CE broilers than in control broilers
at days 5 and 21. The supply of a CE product from day 0 to 7 prevented
colonization of CTX-M-1-E. coli after challenge at day 5, likely as a result of
CE induced effects on the microbiota composition. Furthermore,
compartmentalization reduced transmission rate between broilers. Therefore, a
combination of compartmentalization and supply of a CE product may be a useful
intervention to reduce transmission and prevent colonization of
ESBL/pAmpC-producing bacteria in the broiler production pyramid.

Copyright © 2020 Dame-Korevaar, Kers, van der Goot, Velkers, Ceccarelli, Mevius, 
Stegeman and Fischer.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.566619 
PMCID: PMC7693455
PMID: 33304325 

