
1. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2020 Jul 1;16(7):1119-1134. doi: 10.1166/jbn.2020.2949.

Recombinant Endoglin-Single-Chain Variable Fragment/ Induced Protein 10 Fusion
Protein Potently Boosts the Anti-Tumor Efficacy of Adoptively Transferred
TRP2-Specific CD8+ CD28+ Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes in Mice.

Li Y, Yang X, Lu X, Peng Z, Lai C, Xie S, Wei S, Yao H, Ding Z, Zhao X, Liu A,
Hou X, Mo F.

In this research, we studied the therapeutic efficacy of a newly designed fusion 
protein containing Endoglin single-chain variable fragment and IP10
(Endoglin-scFv/IP10), together with our recently generated TRP2-specific CD8+
CD28+ CTLs (CD8+ CD28+ CTLs) in controlling melanoma growth in mice. The
recombinant Endoglin-scFv/IP10 was expressed in E. coli, purified by affinity
chromatography, and characterized in vitro for its chemotactic movement and
immunoreactivity with endoglin-expressing cells. In vivo, melanoma xenografts
were established in mice (C57BL/6) using B16F10 cells. After that, mice were
treated with intravenous injections of vehicle (PBS), Endoglin-scFv/IP10 alone,
CD8+ CD28+ CTLs alone, or Endoglin-scFv/IP10+ CD8+ CD28+ CTLs. The therapeutic
efficacy was assessed by monitoring tumor growth, mouse survival and cellular
biomarkers. Endoglin-scFv/IP10 fusion protein combined with CD8+ CD28+ CTLs
observed a reduction in tumor growth, resulting in improved survival. On the
cellular level, the combination treatment dramatically reduced the number of
systemic and tumor associated myeloid-derived suppressor cells or regulatory T
cells, increased tumor-responsive interferon-Î³-producing lymphocytes and
tumor-associated CD8+ CXCR3+ T cells, and inhibited proliferation and
angiogenesis but stimulated apoptosis within melanoma tissue. This study
demonstrates the therapeutic potential of Endoglin-scFv/IP10 fusion protein in
combination with CD8+ CD28+ CTLs in melanoma treatment.

DOI: 10.1166/jbn.2020.2949 
PMID: 33308379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

