
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2021 Jan 15;16(1):96-105. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.0c00773. Epub
2020 Dec 14.

PtmC Catalyzes the Final Step of Thioplatensimycin, Thioplatencin, and
Thioplatensilin Biosynthesis and Expands the Scope of Arylamine
N-Acetyltransferases.

Zheng CJ, Kalkreuter E, Fan BY, Liu YC, Dong LB, Shen B.

The members of the arylamine N-acetyltransferase (NAT) family of enzymes are
important for their many roles in xenobiotic detoxification in bacteria and
humans. However, very little is known about their roles outside of detoxification
or their specificities for acyl donors larger than acetyl-CoA. Herein, we report 
the detailed study of PtmC, an unusual NAT homologue encoded in the biosynthetic 
gene cluster for thioplatensimycin, thioplatencin, and a newly reported scaffold,
thioplatensilin, thioacid-containing diterpenoids and highly potent inhibitors of
bacterial and mammalian fatty acid synthases. As the final enzyme of the pathway,
PtmC is responsible for the selection of a thioacid arylamine over its cognate
carboxylic acid and coupling to at least three large, 17-carbon ketolide-CoA
substrates. Therefore, this study uses a combined approach of enzymology and
molecular modeling to reveal how PtmC has evolved from the canonical NAT scaffold
into a key part of a natural combinatorial biosynthetic pathway. Additionally,
genome mining has revealed the presence of other related NATs located within
natural product biosynthetic gene clusters. Thus, findings from this study are
expected to expand our knowledge of how enzymes evolve for expanded substrate
diversity and enable additional predictions about the activities of NATs involved
in natural product biosynthesis and xenobiotic detoxification.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.0c00773 
PMID: 33314918 

