
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2021 Feb 4;368(2). pii: fnaa212. doi:
10.1093/femsle/fnaa212.

Carbon-dependent growth, community structure and methane oxidation performance of
a soil-derived methanotrophic mixed culture.

Praeg N(1), Schachner I(1), Schuster L(1), Illmer P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universität Innsbruck, Department of Microbiology, Technikerstrasse 25d,
A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Soil-borne methane-oxidizing microorganisms act as a terrestrial methane (CH4)
sink and are potentially useful in decreasing global CH4 emissions. Understanding
the ecophysiology of methanotrophs is crucial for a thorough description of
global carbon cycling. Here, we report the in situ balance of soils from
abandoned landfills, meadows and wetlands, their capacities to produce and
oxidize CH4 at laboratory-scale and the isolation of a soil-borne
methanotrophic-heterotrophic mixed culture that was used for carbon (C1 and C2)
feeding experiments. We showed that even with similar soil properties, the in
situ CH4 balance depends on land-use. Different soils had different potentials to
adapt to increased CH4 availability, leading to the highest CH4 oxidation
capacities for landfill and wetland soils. The most efficient mixed culture
isolated from the landfill was dominated by the methanotrophs Methylobacter sp.
and Methylosinus sp., which were accompanied by Variovorax sp. and Pseudomonas
sp. and remained active in oxidizing CH4 when supplied with additional C-sources.
The ratios between type I and type II methanotrophs and between methanotrophic
and heterotrophic bacteria changed when C-sources were altered. A significant
effect of the application of the mixed culture on the CH4 oxidation of soils was 
established but the extent varied depending on soil type.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of FEMS..

DOI: 10.1093/femsle/fnaa212 
PMID: 33320954 

