
1. Food Sci Technol Int. 2020 Dec 15:1082013220976487. doi:
10.1177/1082013220976487. [Epub ahead of print]

The effects of time and relative humidity on dry-aged beef: Traditional versus
special bag.

Bernardo APDS(1), Da Silva ACM(1), Ferreira FMS(1), Do Nascimento MDS(1),
Pflanzer SB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Technology, School of Food Engineering, University of
Campinas - Unicamp, Campinas, Brazil.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the effects of relative humidity (RH)
and different dry aging methods on the quality of beef. Sixteen loins, from eight
carcasses, were used in this experiment. Each pair of loin was cut into eight
sections with equal size, which were evenly assigned to eight treatments, by the 
combination of two dry aging methods (traditional and highly moisture-permeable
special bag), two relative humidity (65 and 85% RH) and two aging times (21 and
42 days). At 85% RH, neither special bag nor the traditional dry aging methods
were viable, since samples presented high microbiological counts, mucus and bad
odor. At 65% RH, Enterobacteriaceae and lactic acid bacteria were not detected in
any treatment. The highest aerobic plate count and psychrotrophic count were
observed in the samples of the traditional dry-aged process whereas the special
bag showed the greatest mold and yeast count. Regarding dry aging in special bag,
there was a reduction in the weight loss (P < 0.05) and no change in the
physical-chemical characteristics (P > 0.05) compared to traditional dry aging.
The values of pH, moisture and Warner-Bratzler shear force were not affected
(P > 0.05) by aging method and relative humidity. Thus, the results indicate that
high RH should be avoided for both dry aging methods. Furthermore, the special
bag dry aging can be considered an alternative to produce dry-aged beef, as it
reduces weight losses even at conditions of lower relative humidity.

DOI: 10.1177/1082013220976487 
PMID: 33322928 

