
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Dec 11;99(50):e22418. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000022418.

The APLNR gene polymorphism rs7119375 is associated with an increased risk of
development of essential hypertension in the Chinese population: A meta-analysis.

Yoshikawa M(1), Asaba K(2), Nakayama T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Department of Pathology and Microbiology,
Nihon University School of Medicine.
(2)Department of Computational Diagnostic Radiology and Preventive Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Hypertension (HT) has recently been defined as a systolic blood pressure (BP) of 
≥130 mm Hg and/or a diastolic BP of ≥80 mm Hg. It is important to further
understand the pathophysiology of essential HT as its proportion is larger among 
most of the diagnosed HT cases. The apelin and apelin receptor (APLNR) are known 
to play roles in regulating BP, but the putative associations of single
nucleotide polymorphisms in the APLNR gene with the risk of development of
essential HT have not yet been fully investigated. Herein, we conducted a
meta-analysis to investigate the relationship between single nucleotide
polymorphisms in the APLNR gene and the risk of essential HT.We conducted a
search in the PubMed and Web of Science databases for eligible studies. The
pooled odds ratios (ORs) with their 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated
using random-effects models when heterogeneity was expected across the studies.
Otherwise, fixed-effect models were used.Regarding the SNP rs7119375, 5 studies
were analyzed, which included a total of 3567 essential HT patients and 3256
healthy controls. Four of the 5 studies were from China and 1 was from Mexico.
The meta-analysis showed the existence of a significant association between the
AA genotype of rs7119375 and the risk of developing essential HT in the Chinese
population, as determined using additive and recessive models (OR, 2.11; 95% CI, 
1.12-3.96; I = 86% for AA vs GG. OR, 1.53; 95% CI, 1.21-1.94; I = 28% for AA vs
AG. OR, 1.88; 95% CI, 1.13-3.12; I = 79% for AA vs AG + GG).Our study showed, for
the first time, the existence of an association between rs7119375 and the risk of
development of essential HT in the Chinese population, although the sample size
was small and there was considerable population heterogeneity. The apelin/APLNR
system could be a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of essential HT, and
more studies are warranted to further investigate the association.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000022418 
PMCID: PMC7738041
PMID: 33327224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

