
1. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2021 Mar;285:103598. doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2020.103598.
Epub 2020 Dec 14.

The effects of NO on the urea cycle pathway in short-term intermittent hypobaric 
hypoxia in rats.

Javrushyan H(1), Avtandilyan N(2), Trchounian A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Research Institute of Biology, Yerevan State
University, Yerevan, Armenia. Electronic address: hg.javrushyan@ysu.am.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Research Institute of Biology, Yerevan State
University, Yerevan, Armenia; Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and
Biotechnology, Yerevan State University, Yerevan, Armenia. Electronic address:
nv.avtandilyan@ysu.am.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Biotechnology, Yerevan State
University, Yerevan, Armenia. Electronic address: Trchounian@ysu.am.

Short-term hypoxic states can influence the health and life activities of
lowlanders who travel shortly to high altitudes, in transitory situations, such
as surgical ischemia-reperfusion (to one or several organs), and in some sporting
activities, such as parachuting and extreme skiing, mountain rescue teams,
regular commercial flight crews, in which the subject may not even notice the
hypoxia. NO is an integral part of the human physiological response to hypoxia.
Until recently, the urea cycle (UC) was only considered as an important mechanism
for neutralizing ammonia. We are the first to reveal an interrelation in hypoxic 
states between the activities of NO-synthase and UC enzymes in male rats' liver, 
kidney and brain. In the presented work, we have shown that during short-term
intermittent hypobaric hypoxia (IHH) all enzymes of UC play an important role in 
the maintenance of NO quantity. The results allow thinking that kidney and brain 
argininosuccinate synthase (ASS) and argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) and liver ASS 
and ASL can be different isoenzymes. It is worth mentioning that the results have
revealed new sides of l-arginine metabolism in a hypoxic state in male rats.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2020.103598 
PMID: 33326865 

