
1. Pathogens. 2020 Dec 10;9(12). pii: E1035. doi: 10.3390/pathogens9121035.

Imidocarb Dipropionate Lacks Efficacy against Theileria haneyi and Fails to
Consistently Clear Theileria equi in Horses Co-Infected with T. haneyi.

Sears K(1), Knowles D(1), Dinkel K(1), Mshelia PW(1)(2), Onzere C(1), Silva
M(1)(3), Fry L(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Program in Vector-borne
Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman,
WA 99164, USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria 810253,
Nigeria.
(3)CureVac AG, 72076 Tubingen, Germany.
(4)Animal Disease Research Unit, USDA-ARS, Pullman, WA 99164, USA.

Control of Theileria equi, the primary cause of equine theileriosis, is largely
reliant on acaracide use and chemosterilization with imidocarb dipropionate (ID).
However, it is currently unknown if ID is effective against Theileria haneyi, the
recently identified second causative agent of equine theileriosis, or if the drug
maintains effectiveness against T. equi in the presence of T. haneyi
co-infection. The purpose of this study was to address these questions using ID
treatment of the following three groups of horses: (1) five T. haneyi infected
horses; (2) three T. haneyi-T. equi infected horses; and (3) three T. equi-T.
haneyi infected horses. Clearance was first evaluated using nPCR for each
Theileria sp. on peripheral blood samples. ID failed to clear T. haneyi in all
three groups of horses, and failed to clear T. equi in two of three horses in
group two. For definitive confirmation of infection status, horses in groups two 
and three underwent splenectomy post-treatment. The T. equi-nPCR-positive horses 
in group two developed severe clinical signs and were euthanized. Remaining
horses exhibited moderate signs consistent with T. haneyi. Our results
demonstrate that ID therapy lacks efficacy against T. haneyi, and T. haneyi-T.
equi co-infection may interfere with ID clearance of T. equi.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens9121035 
PMCID: PMC7764667
PMID: 33321715 

