
1. Chemistry. 2021 Feb 15;27(10):3542-3551. doi: 10.1002/chem.202004831. Epub 2021
Jan 21.

Synthesis of Carbapenems Containing Peptidoglycan Mimetics and Inhibition of the 
Cross-Linking Activity of a Transpeptidase of l,d Specificity.

Saidjalolov S(1), Edoo Z(2), Fonvielle M(2), Mayer L(2), Iannazzo L(1), Arthur
M(2), Etheve-Quelquejeu M(1), Braud E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie et Biochimie Pharmacologiques et Toxicologiques, UMR
8601 CNRS, Université de Paris, 45, rue des saints-pères, Paris, 75006, France.
(2)INSERM UMRS 1138, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Université de Paris, Centre de recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, 75006,
France.

The carbapenem class of β-lactams has been optimized against Gram-negative
bacteria producing extended-spectrum β-lactamases by introducing substituents at 
position C2. Carbapenems are currently investigated for the treatment of
tuberculosis as these drugs are potent covalent inhibitors of l,d-transpeptidases
involved in mycobacterial cell wall assembly. The optimization of carbapenems for
inactivation of these unusual targets is sought herein by exploiting the
nucleophilicity of the C8 hydroxyl group to introduce chemical diversity. As
β-lactams are structure analogs of peptidoglycan precursors, the substituents
were chosen to increase similarity between the drug and the substrate. Fourteen
peptido-carbapenems were efficiently synthesized. They were more effective than
the reference drug, meropenem, owing to the positive impact of a phenethylthio
substituent introduced at position C2 but the peptidomimetics added at position
C8 did not further improve the activity. Thus, position C8 can be modified to
modulate the pharmacokinetic properties of highly efficient carbapenems.

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.202004831 
PMID: 33336443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

