
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Dec 15;17(24). pii: E9378. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17249378.

Cholera Risk: A Machine Learning Approach Applied to Essential Climate Variables.

Campbell AM(1), Racault MF(2)(3), Goult S(2)(3), Laurenson A(2).

Author information: 
(1)European Space Agency, Climate Office, ECSAT, Harwell OX11 0FD, UK.
(2)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, The Hoe, Plymouth PL1 3DH, UK.
(3)National Centre For Earth Observation, PML, Plymouth PL1 3DH, UK.

Oceanic and coastal ecosystems have undergone complex environmental changes in
recent years, amid a context of climate change. These changes are also reflected 
in the dynamics of water-borne diseases as some of the causative agents of these 
illnesses are ubiquitous in the aquatic environment and their survival rates are 
impacted by changes in climatic conditions. Previous studies have established
strong relationships between essential climate variables and the coastal
distribution and seasonal dynamics of the bacteria Vibrio cholerae, pathogenic
types of which are responsible for human cholera disease. In this study we
provide a novel exploration of the potential of a machine learning approach to
forecast environmental cholera risk in coastal India, home to more than 200
million inhabitants, utilising atmospheric, terrestrial and oceanic
satellite-derived essential climate variables. A Random Forest classifier model
is developed, trained and tested on a cholera outbreak dataset over the period
2010-2018 for districts along coastal India. The random forest classifier model
has an Accuracy of 0.99, an F1 Score of 0.942 and a Sensitivity score of 0.895,
meaning that 89.5% of outbreaks are correctly identified. Spatio-temporal
patterns emerged in terms of the model's performance based on seasons and coastal
locations. Further analysis of the specific contribution of each Essential
Climate Variable to the model outputs shows that chlorophyll-a concentration, sea
surface salinity and land surface temperature are the strongest predictors of the
cholera outbreaks in the dataset used. The study reveals promising potential of
the use of random forest classifiers and remotely-sensed essential climate
variables for the development of environmental cholera-risk applications. Further
exploration of the present random forest model and associated essential climate
variables is encouraged on cholera surveillance datasets in other coastal areas
affected by the disease to determine the model's transferability potential and
applicative value for cholera forecasting systems.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17249378 
PMCID: PMC7765326
PMID: 33333823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

