
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Nov 20;10:575289. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2020.575289. eCollection 2020.

Emergence of Multidrug Resistant Hypervirulent ST23 Klebsiella pneumoniae:
Multidrug Resistant Plasmid Acquisition Drives Evolution.

Shankar C(1), Jacob JJ(1), Vasudevan K(1), Biswas R(2), Manesh A(3), Sethuvel
DPM(1), Varughese S(4), Biswas I(5), Veeraraghavan B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Christian Medical College and Hospital,
Vellore, India.
(2)College of Biological Sciences, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, MN,
United States.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Christian Medical College and Hospital,
Vellore, India.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Christian Medical College and Hospital, Vellore,
India.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of
Kansas Medical Centre, Kansas City, KS, United States.

Background: In recent years, the emergence of multidrug resistant hypervirulent
K. pneumoniae (MDR hvKp) isolates poses severe therapeutic challenge to global
public health. The present study used the complete genome sequence of two MDR
hvKp isolates belonging to ST23 to characterize the phylogenetic background and
plasmid diversity.
Methods: Two hvKp isolates from patients with bacteremia were sequenced using Ion
Torrent PGM and Oxford Nanopore MinION platforms and assembled by hybrid genome
assembly approach. Comparative genomics approaches were used to investigate the
population structure, evolution, virulence, and antimicrobial resistance of MDR
hvKp strains.
Results: The study isolates exhibited typical features of hvKp phenotypes
associated with ST23. The convergence of multidrug resistance and hypervirulence 
were attributed by the presence of multiple plasmids including a 216 kb virulence
plasmid and MDR plasmids belonging to IncA/C2, IncFIB, IncX3, and ColKP3 groups. 
The insertion of catA1 gene into virulence plasmid was observed along with
genetic factors such as aerobactin, salmochelin, and rmpA2 that confer hvKp's
hypervirulent phenotype. The core genome single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
phylogenetic analyses of the isolates showed the evolution of ST23 hvKp was
predominantly driven by ICEKp acquisitions.
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of MDR hvKp
isolates of ST23 with insertion of catA1 gene into the virulence plasmid which
presents the possibility of hotspot integration sites on the plasmids to aid
acquisition of AMR genes. ST23 is no longer confined to susceptible strains of
hvKp. Our findings emphasize the need for more studies on recombinant events,
plasmid transmission dynamics and evolutionary process involving hvKp.

Copyright Â© 2020 Shankar, Jacob, Vasudevan, Biswas, Manesh, Sethuvel, Varughese, 
Biswas and Veeraraghavan.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.575289 
PMCID: PMC7718023
PMID: 33330125 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

