
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Dec 17;21(24). pii: E9613. doi: 10.3390/ijms21249613.

AhR Activation Leads to Alterations in the Gut Microbiome with Consequent Effect 
on Induction of Myeloid Derived Suppressor Cells in a CXCR2-Dependent Manner.

Neamah WH(1), Busbee PB(1), Alghetaa H(1), Abdulla OA(1), Nagarkatti M(1),
Nagarkatti P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology & Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC 29209, USA.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor and
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a potent ligand for AhR and a known
carcinogen. While AhR activation by TCDD leads to significant immunosuppression, 
how this translates into carcinogenic signal is unclear. Recently, we
demonstrated that activation of AhR by TCDD in na√Øve C57BL6 mice leads to massive
induction of myeloid derived-suppressor cells (MDSCs). In the current study, we
investigated the role of the gut microbiota in TCDD-mediated MDSC induction. TCDD
caused significant alterations in the gut microbiome, such as increases in
Prevotella and Lactobacillus, while decreasing Sutterella and Bacteroides. Fecal 
transplants from TCDD-treated donor mice into antibiotic-treated mice induced
MDSCs and increased regulatory T-cells (Tregs). Injecting TCDD directly into
antibiotic-treated mice also induced MDSCs, although to a lesser extent. These
data suggested that TCDD-induced dysbiosis plays a critical role in MDSC
induction. Interestingly, treatment with TCDD led to induction of MDSCs in the
colon and undetectable levels of cysteine. MDSCs suppressed T cell proliferation 
while reconstitution with cysteine restored this response. Lastly, blocking CXC
chemokine receptor 2 (CXCR2) impeded TCDD-mediated MDSC induction. Our data
demonstrate that AhR activation by TCDD triggers dysbiosis which, in turn,
regulates, at least in part, induction of MDSCs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21249613 
PMCID: PMC7767008
PMID: 33348596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

