
1. Cell Rep. 2020 Dec 22;33(12):108527. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108527.

An RNA Repair Operon Regulated by Damaged tRNAs.

Hughes KJ(1), Chen X(2), Burroughs AM(3), Aravind L(3), Wolin SL(4).

Author information: 
(1)RNA Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD 21702, USA; Department of Cell
Biology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(2)RNA Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. Electronic address:
xinguo.chen@nih.gov.
(3)Computational Biology Branch, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20894,
USA.
(4)RNA Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. Electronic address:
sandra.wolin@nih.gov.

Many bacteria contain an RNA repair operon, encoding the RtcB RNA ligase and the 
RtcA RNA cyclase, that is regulated by the RtcR transcriptional activator.
Although RtcR contains a divergent version of the CARF (CRISPR-associated Rossman
fold) oligonucleotide-binding regulatory domain, both the specific signal that
regulates operon expression and the substrates of the encoded enzymes are
unknown. We report that tRNA fragments activate operon expression. Using a
genetic screen in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, we find that the
operon is expressed in the presence of mutations that cause tRNA fragments to
accumulate. RtcA, which converts RNA phosphate ends to 2', 3'-cyclic phosphate,
is also required. Operon expression and tRNA fragment accumulation also occur
upon DNA damage. The CARF domain binds 5' tRNA fragments ending in cyclic
phosphate, and RtcR oligomerizes upon binding these ligands, a prerequisite for
operon activation. Our studies reveal a signaling pathway involving broken tRNAs 
and implicate the operon in tRNA repair.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108527 
PMCID: PMC7790460
PMID: 33357439 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no
competing interests.

