
1. Molecules. 2020 Dec 19;25(24). pii: E6021. doi: 10.3390/molecules25246021.

Fermentation Enhanced Biotransformation of Compounds in the Kernel of
Chrysophyllum albidum.

Odutayo OE(1), Omonigbehin EA(2), Olawole TD(1), Ogunlana OO(1), Afolabi IS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, College of Science and Technology, Covenant
University, Ota 100122, Nigeria.
(2)Molecular Biology Laboratory, College of Science and Technology, Covenant
University, Ota 100122, Nigeria.

Chrysophyllum albidum Linn (African star apple) is a fruit with extensive
nutritional and medicinal benefits. The fruit and kernel in the seed are both
edible. Strains of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) were isolated from fermented seeds 
and assessed for probiotic characteristics. The extracts in both the unfermented 
and the fermented aqueous extracts from the kernels obtained from the seeds of C.
albidum were subjected to analysis using the gas chromatography/mass spectrometry
(GC-MS) method. This analysis identified the bioactive compounds present as
possible substrate(s) for the associated organisms inducing the fermentation and 
the resultant biotransformed products formed. Three potential probiotic LAB
strains identified as Lactococcus raffinolactis (ProbtA1), Lactococcus lactis
(ProbtA2a), and Pediococcus pentosaceus (ProbtA2b) were isolated from the
fermented C. albidum seeds. All strains were non hemolytic, which indicated their
safety, Probt (A1, A2a, and A2b) grew in an acidic environment (pH 3.5) during
the 48-h incubation time, and all three strains grew in 1% bile, and exhibited
good hydrophobicity and auto-aggregation properties. Mucin binding proteins was
not detected in any strain, and bile salt hydrolase was detected in all the
strains. l-lactic acid (28.57%), norharman (5.07%), formyl 7E-hexadecenoate
(1.73%), and indole (1.51%) were the four major constituents of the fermented
kernel of the C. albidum, while 2,5-dimethylpyrazine (C1, 1.27%),
3,5-dihydroxy-6-methyl-2,3-dihydropyran-4-one (C2, 2.90%), indole (C3, 1.31%),
norharman (C4, 3.01%), and methyl petroselinate (C5, 4.33%) were the five major
constituents of the unfermented kernels. The isolated LAB are safe for
consumption. The fermenting process metabolized C1, C2, and C5, which are
possible starter cultures for the growth of probiotics. Fermentation is an
essential tool for bioengineering molecules in foods into safe and health
beneficial products.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25246021 
PMCID: PMC7768532
PMID: 33352625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

