
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2020 Dec 10;8:615031. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.615031.
eCollection 2020.

Molecular Basis for CCRL2 Regulation of Leukocyte Migration.

Schioppa T(1)(2), Sozio F(1)(2), Barbazza I(1), Scutera S(3), Bosisio D(1),
Sozzani S(4), Del Prete A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia,
Brescia, Italy.
(2)Humanitas Clinical and Research Center Rozzano-Milano, Rozzano, Italy.
(3)Microbiology Section, Department of Public Health and Pediatric Sciences,
University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(4)Laboratory Affiliated to Istituto Pasteur Italia-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, 
Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

CCRL2 is a seven-transmembrane domain receptor that belongs to the chemokine
receptor family. At difference from other members of this family, CCRL2 does not 
promote chemotaxis and shares structural features with atypical chemokine
receptors (ACKRs). However, CCRL2 also differs from ACKRs since it does not bind 
chemokines and is devoid of scavenging functions. The only commonly recognized
CCRL2 ligand is chemerin, a non-chemokine chemotactic protein. CCRL2 is expressed
both by leukocytes and non-hematopoietic cells. The genetic ablation of CCRL2 has
been instrumental to elucidate the role of this receptor as positive or negative 
regulator of inflammation. CCRL2 modulates leukocyte migration by two main
mechanisms. First, when CCRL2 is expressed by barrier cells, such endothelial,
and epithelial cells, it acts as a presenting molecule, contributing to the
formation of a non-soluble chemotactic gradient for leukocytes expressing CMKLR1,
the functional chemerin receptor. This mechanism was shown to be crucial in the
induction of NK cell-dependent immune surveillance in lung cancer progression and
metastasis. Second, by forming heterocomplexes with other chemokine receptors.
For instance, CCRL2/CXCR2 heterodimers were shown to regulate the activation of
β2-integrins in mouse neutrophils. This mini-review summarizes the current
understanding of CCRL2 biology, based on experimental evidence obtained by the
genetic deletion of this receptor in in vivo experimental models. Further studies
are required to highlight the complex functional role of CCRL2 in different
organs and pathological conditions.

Copyright © 2020 Schioppa, Sozio, Barbazza, Scutera, Bosisio, Sozzani and Del
Prete.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2020.615031 
PMCID: PMC7758318
PMID: 33363177 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

