
1. Front Pharmacol. 2020 Dec 9;11:587451. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.587451.
eCollection 2020.

Prognostic Genetic Markers for Thrombosis in COVID-19 Patients: A Focused
Analysis on D-Dimer, Homocysteine and Thromboembolism.

Abu-Farha M(1), Al-Sabah S(2), Hammad MM(1), Hebbar P(3), Channanath AM(3), John 
SE(3), Taher I(4), Almaeen A(4), Ghazy A(4)(5), Mohammad A(1), Abubaker J(1),
Arefanian H(6), Al-Mulla F(3), Thanaraj TA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dasman Diabetes Institute,
Dasman, Kuwait.
(2)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait City,
Kuwait.
(3)Department of Genetics and Bioinformatics, Dasman Diabetes Institute, Dasman, 
Kuwait.
(4)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Jouf University, Sakaka, Saudi
Arabia.
(5)Department of Microbiology & Medical Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
Kafrelsheikh University, Kafrelsheikh, Egypt.
(6)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Dasman Diabetes Institute, Dasman, 
Kuwait.

COVID-19 is caused by Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2, which has 
infected over thirty eight million individuals worldwide. Emerging evidence
indicates that COVID-19 patients are at a high risk of developing coagulopathy
and thrombosis, conditions that elevate levels of D-dimer. It is believed that
homocysteine, an amino acid that plays a crucial role in coagulation, may also
contribute to these conditions. At present, multiple genes are implicated in the 
development of these disorders. For example, single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in FGG, FGA, and F5 mediate increases in D-dimer and SNPs in ABO, CBS,
CPS1 and MTHFR mediate differences in homocysteine levels, and SNPs in TDAG8
associate with Heparin-induced Thrombocytopenia. In this study, we aimed to
uncover the genetic basis of the above conditions by examining genome-wide
associations and tissue-specific gene expression to build a molecular network.
Based on gene ontology, we annotated various SNPs with five ancestral terms:
pulmonary embolism, venous thromboembolism, vascular diseases, cerebrovascular
disorders, and stroke. The gene-gene interaction network revealed three clusters 
that each contained hallmark genes for D-dimer/fibrinogen levels, homocysteine
levels, and arterial/venous thromboembolism with F2 and F5 acting as connecting
nodes. We propose that genotyping COVID-19 patients for SNPs examined in this
study will help identify those at greatest risk of complications linked to
thrombosis.

Copyright Â© 2020 Abu-Farha, Al-Sabah, Hammad, Hebbar, Channanath, John, Taher,
Almaeen, Ghazy, Mohammad, Abubaker, Arefanian, Al-Mulla and Thanaraj.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.587451 
PMCID: PMC7756688
PMID: 33362545 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

