
1. Planta. 2021 Jan 2;253(1):7. doi: 10.1007/s00425-020-03538-4.

Specific tissue proteins 1 and 6 are involved in root biology during normal
development and under symbiotic and pathogenic interactions in Medicago
truncatula.

Albornos L(1)(2), Casado-Del-Castillo V(3)(2), Martín I(1)(2), Díaz-Mínguez
JM(3)(2), Labrador E(1)(2), Dopico B(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Botánica y Fisiología Vegetal, Universidad de Salamanca, C/
Licenciado Méndez Nieto s/n, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, 37007, Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Instituto Hispano-Luso de Investigaciones Agrarias (CIALE), Universidad de
Salamanca, Campus de Villamayor, C/ Río Duero 12, Villamayor, 37185, Salamanca,
Spain.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología y Genética, Universidad de Salamanca, Campus
Miguel de Unamuno, Edificio departamental, 37007, Salamanca, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Botánica y Fisiología Vegetal, Universidad de Salamanca, C/
Licenciado Méndez Nieto s/n, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, 37007, Salamanca, Spain.
bdr@usal.es.
(5)Instituto Hispano-Luso de Investigaciones Agrarias (CIALE), Universidad de
Salamanca, Campus de Villamayor, C/ Río Duero 12, Villamayor, 37185, Salamanca,
Spain. bdr@usal.es.

MAIN CONCLUSION: ST1 and ST6 are possibly involved in primary and lateral root
and symbiotic nodule development, but only ST6 participates in the interaction
with hemibiotrophic fungi. Specific tissue (ST) proteins have been shown to be
involved in several processes related to plant nutritional status, development,
and responses to biotic agents. In particular, ST1 and ST6 are mainly expressed
in roots throughout plant development. Here, we analyze where and how the
expression of the genes encoding both proteins are modulated in the legume model 
plant Medicago truncatula in response to the plant developmental program,
nodulation induced by a beneficial nitrogen-fixing bacterium (Sinorhizobium
meliloti) and the defense response triggered by a pathogenic hemibiotrophic
fungus (Fusarium oxysporum). Gene expression results show that ST1 and ST6
participate in the vasculature development of both primary and lateral roots,
although only ST6 is related to meristem activity. ST1 and ST6 clearly display
different roles in the biotic interactions analyzed, where ST1 is activated in
response to a N2-fixing bacterium and ST6 is up-regulated after inoculation with 
F. oxysporum. The role of ST1 and ST6 in the nodulation process may be related to
nodule organogenesis rather than to the establishment of the interaction itself, 
and an increase in ST6 correlates with the activation of the salicylic acid
signaling pathway during the infection and colonization processes. These results 
further support the role of ST6 in response to hemibiotrophic fungi. This
research contributes to the understanding of the complex network that controls
root biology and strengthens the idea that ST proteins are involved in several
processes such as primary and lateral root development, nodule organogenesis, and
the plant-microbe interaction.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-020-03538-4 
PMID: 33387090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

