
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Dec 29;9(1). pii: E64. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9010064.

Rock Surface Fungi in Deep Continental Biosphere-Exploration of Microbial
Community Formation with Subsurface In Situ Biofilm Trap.

Nuppunen-Puputti M(1), Kietäväinen R(2), Purkamo L(2), Rajala P(1), Itävaara
M(1), Kukkonen I(3), Bomberg M(1).

Author information: 
(1)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd., 02044 Espoo, Finland.
(2)Geological Survey of Finland, 02151 Espoo, Finland.
(3)Physics Department, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Fungi have an important role in nutrient cycling in most ecosystems on Earth, yet
their ecology and functionality in deep continental subsurface remain unknown.
Here, we report the first observations of active fungal colonization of mica
schist in the deep continental biosphere and the ability of deep subsurface fungi
to attach to rock surfaces under in situ conditions in groundwater at 500 and 967
m depth in Precambrian bedrock. We present an in situ subsurface biofilm trap,
designed to reveal sessile microbial communities on rock surface in deep
continental groundwater, using Outokumpu Deep Drill Hole, in eastern Finland, as 
a test site. The observed fungal phyla in Outokumpu subsurface were
Basidiomycota, Ascomycota, and Mortierellomycota. In addition, significant
proportion of the community represented unclassified Fungi. Sessile fungal
communities on mica schist surfaces differed from the planktic fungal
communities. The main bacterial phyla were Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and
Actinobacteriota. Biofilm formation on rock surfaces is a slow process and our
results indicate that fungal and bacterial communities dominate the early surface
attachment process, when pristine mineral surfaces are exposed to deep subsurface
ecosystems. Various fungi showed statistically significant cross-kingdom
correlation with both thiosulfate and sulfate reducing bacteria, e.g., SRB2 with 
fungi Debaryomyces hansenii.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9010064 
PMCID: PMC7824546
PMID: 33383728 

