
1. Curr Microbiol. 2021 Feb;78(2):668-678. doi: 10.1007/s00284-020-02305-8. Epub
2021 Jan 5.

Interaction and Effects of Bacteria Addition on Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
Biodegradation by Daedalea dickinsii.

Rizqi HD(1), Purnomo AS(2), Kamei I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Data Analytics, Institut
Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember (ITS), Kampus ITS Sukolilo, Surabaya, 60111,
Indonesia.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Data Analytics, Institut
Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember (ITS), Kampus ITS Sukolilo, Surabaya, 60111,
Indonesia. adi_setyo@chem.its.ac.id.
(3)Department of Forest and Environmental Science, Faculty of Agriculture,
University of Miyazaki, 1-1, Gakuen-kibanadai-nishi, Miyazaki, 889-2192, Japan.

The residue of organochlorine pesticides (OCPs) has been a major pollution
problem in our environment. Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) is one of the
most common persistent OCPs that continue to pose a serious risk to human health 
and the environment. Some treatment methods have been developed to reduce and
minimize the adverse impacts of the use of DDT, including biodegradation with
brown-rot fungi (BRF). However, DDT degradation using BRF has still low
degradation rate and needs a long incubation time. Therefore, the ability of BRF 
need to be enhanced to degrade DDT. Interaction and effect of bacteria addition
on biodegradation of DDT by brown-rot fungus Daedalea dickinsii were
investigated. The interaction assay between D. dickinsii with bacteria addition
showed that the addition of bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa did not provide
resistance to the growth of D. dickinsii. Meanwhile, bacterium Bacillus subtilis 
addition has an inhibitory effect on the growth of D. dickinsii. The addition of 
10 ml (1 ml = 1.05 × 109 CFU/ml bacteria cell) of P. aeruginosa and B. subtilis
was able to improve DDT biodegradation by D. dickinsii from 53.61% to 96.70% and 
67.60%, respectively. The highest biodegradation capability of DDT was obtained
through addition of 10 ml of P. aeruginosa into the D. dickinsii culture in which
the mixed cultures produce final metabolites of
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDD) and
1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethylene (DDMU). This study indicated that the
addition of P. aeruginosa can be used for optimization of DDT biodegradation by
D. dickinsii.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-020-02305-8 
PMID: 33398445 

