
1. Materials (Basel). 2021 Jan 1;14(1). pii: E177. doi: 10.3390/ma14010177.

The Bad and the Good-Microorganisms in Cultural Heritage Environments-An Update
on Biodeterioration and Biotreatment Approaches.

Pyzik A(1), Ciuchcinski K(1), Dziurzynski M(1), Dziewit L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Microbiology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Microbiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, 02-096
Warsaw, Poland.

Cultural heritage objects constitute a very diverse environment, inhabited by
various bacteria and fungi. The impact of these microorganisms on the degradation
of artworks is undeniable, but at the same time, some of them may be applied for 
the efficient biotreatment of cultural heritage assets. Interventions with
microorganisms have been proven to be useful in restoration of artworks, when
classical chemical and mechanical methods fail or produce poor or short-term
effects. The path to understanding the impact of microbes on historical objects
relies mostly on multidisciplinary approaches, combining novel meta-omic
technologies with classical cultivation experiments, and physico-chemical
characterization of artworks. In particular, the development of metabolomic- and 
metatranscriptomic-based analyses associated with metagenomic studies may
significantly increase our understanding of the microbial processes occurring on 
different materials and under various environmental conditions. Moreover, the
progress in environmental microbiology and biotechnology may enable more
effective application of microorganisms in the biotreatment of historical
objects, creating an alternative to highly invasive chemical and mechanical
methods.

DOI: 10.3390/ma14010177 
PMCID: PMC7795576
PMID: 33401448 

