
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2020 Dec 23;8:621166. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.621166.
eCollection 2020.

Overcoming Energetic Barriers in Acetogenic C1 Conversion.

Katsyv A(1), Müller V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology & Bioenergetics, Institute of Molecular
Biosciences, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Currently one of the biggest challenges for society is to combat global warming. 
A solution to this global threat is the implementation of a CO2-based bioeconomy 
and a H2-based bioenergy economy. Anaerobic lithotrophic bacteria such as the
acetogenic bacteria are key players in the global carbon and H2 cycle and thus
prime candidates as driving forces in a H2- and CO2-bioeconomy. Naturally, they
convert two molecules of CO2 via the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway (WLP) to one molecule
of acetyl-CoA which can be converted to different C2-products (acetate or
ethanol) or elongated to C4 (butyrate) or C5-products (caproate). Since there is 
no net ATP generation from acetate formation, an electron-transport
phosphorylation (ETP) module is hooked up to the WLP. ETP provides the cell with 
additional ATP, but the ATP gain is very low, only a fraction of an ATP per mol
of acetate. Since acetogens live at the thermodynamic edge of life, metabolic
engineering to obtain high-value products is currently limited by the low energy 
status of the cells that allows for the production of only a few compounds with
rather low specificity. To set the stage for acetogens as production platforms
for a wide range of bioproducts from CO2, the energetic barriers have to be
overcome. This review summarizes the pathway, the energetics of the pathway and
describes ways to overcome energetic barriers in acetogenic C1 conversion.

Copyright © 2020 Katsyv and Müller.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.621166 
PMCID: PMC7793690
PMID: 33425882 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

