
1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2021 Jan;28(1):793-804. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2020.11.012. Epub
2020 Nov 11.

Decolorization, degradation and detoxification of carcinogenic sulfonated azo dye
methyl orange by newly developed biofilm consortia.

Haque MM(1), Haque MA(2), Mosharaf MK(1), Marcus PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Agricultural University, Gazipur 1706, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Agro-processing, Faculty of Agriculture, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman Agricultural University, Gazipur 1706, Bangladesh.

Metabolites of azo dyes are often carcinogenic, teratogenic, mutagenic and
recalcitrant in nature. In this study, four biofilm consortia such as C1
(Vitreoscilla sp. ENSG301, Acinetobacter lwoffii ENSG302, Klebsiella pneumoniae
ENSG303 and Pseudomonas fluorescens ENSG304), C2 (Escherichia coli ENSD101,
Enterobacter asburiae ENSD102 and E. ludwigii ENSH201), C3 (E. asburiae ENSD102, 
Vitreoscilla sp. ENSG301 and Bacillus thuringiensis ENSW401), and C4 (E. coli
ENSD101, E. ludwigii ENSH201 and B. thuringiensis ENSW401) were applied to
degrade and detoxify methyl orange (MO), a carcinogenic, sulfonated mono azo dye,
used in textile dyeing industry worldwide. The consortia of C1, C2, C3 and C4
showed 97.30, 98.75, 99.51 and 99.29% decolorization, respectively in yeast
extract peptone (YEP) broth containing 200 mg L-1 MO within 60 h of incubation in
static condition. The optimum pH and temperature for decolorization was 7.0 and
28 °C, respectively. Some divalent metal ions including Mg2+, Ca2+, Zn2+ and Mn2+
could stimulate MO decolorization. UV-Vis spectral analysis showed that the
absorption peak at 465 nm originated from the azo (N[bond, double bond]N) bond
was completely disappeared within 60 h of incubation. Fourier transform infrared 
spectroscopy (FTIR) results also revealed that several major peaks including azo 
bond peak at 1602.6 cm-1 are completely or partly vanished, deformed or shifted. 
Activities of azoreductase, NADH-DCIP reductase and laccase were significantly
increased in the bacterial cells within 60 h of incubation in comparison to that 
of control (0 h). The chemical oxygen demand was incredibly reduced by 85.37 to
91.44% by these consortia. Accordingly, plant (wheat seed germination) and
microbial (growth of the plant probiotic bacteria such as Pseudomonas cedrina
ESR12 and Bacillus cereus ESD3 on biodegraded products) toxicity studies showed
that biodegraded products of MO are non-toxic. Thus, all these consortia can be
utilized in bioremediation of MO from wastewater for safe disposal into
environment. To our knowledge, this is the first report on degradation and
detoxification of MO from wastewater by bacterial biofilm consortia.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2020.11.012 
PMCID: PMC7785453
PMID: 33424369 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

