
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2021 Feb;105(3):1063-1078. doi:
10.1007/s00253-020-11084-y. Epub 2021 Jan 11.

Metagenomic identification, purification and characterisation of the
Bifidobacterium adolescentis BgaC β-galactosidase.

Mulualem DM(1), Agbavwe C(1), Ogilvie LA(2), Jones BV(3), Kilcoyne M(1), O'Byrne 
C(1), Boyd A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Natural Sciences, National University of
Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Biology & Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, UK.
(4)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Natural Sciences, National University of
Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland. aoife.boyd@nuigalway.ie.

Members of the human gut microbiota use glycoside hydrolase (GH) enzymes, such as
β-galactosidases, to forage on host mucin glycans and dietary fibres. A human
faecal metagenomic fosmid library was constructed and functionally screened to
identify novel β-galactosidases. Out of the 16,000 clones screened, 30
β-galactosidase-positive clones were identified. The β-galactosidase gene found
in the majority of the clones was BAD_1582 from Bifidobacterium adolescentis,
subsequently named bgaC. This gene was cloned with a hexahistidine tag, expressed
in Escherichia coli and His-tagged-BgaC was purified using Ni2+-NTA affinity
chromatography and size filtration. The enzyme had optimal activity at pH 7.0 and
37 °C, with a wide range of pH (4-10) and temperature (0-40 °C) stability. It
required a divalent metal ion co-factor; maximum activity was detected with Mg2+,
while Cu2+ and Mn2+ were inhibitory. Kinetic parameters were determined using
ortho-nitrophenyl-β-D-galactopyranoside (ONPG) and lactose substrates. BgaC had a
Vmax of 107 μmol/min/mg and a Km of 2.5 mM for ONPG and a Vmax of 22 μmol/min/mg 
and a Km of 3.7 mM for lactose. It exhibited low product inhibition by galactose 
with a Ki of 116 mM and high tolerance for glucose (66% activity retained in
presence of 700 mM glucose). In addition, BgaC possessed transglycosylation
activity to produce galactooligosaccharides (GOS) from lactose, as determined by 
TLC and HPLC analysis. The enzymatic characteristics of B. adolescentis BgaC make
it an ideal candidate for dairy industry applications and prebiotic
manufacture.Key points• Bifidobacterium adolescentis BgaC β-galactosidase was
selected from human faecal metagenome.• BgaC possesses sought-after properties
for biotechnology, e.g. low product inhibition.• BgaC has transglycosylation
activity producing prebiotic oligosaccharides. Graphical Abstract.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-11084-y 
PMCID: PMC7843569
PMID: 33427933 

