
1. J Food Sci. 2021 Feb;86(2):546-562. doi: 10.1111/1750-3841.15575. Epub 2021 Jan
12.

Protective effect of Ganoderma lucidum spore extract in
trimethylamine-N-oxide-induced cardiac dysfunction in rats.

Liu Y(1)(2), Lai G(2)(3), Guo Y(2), Tang X(2), Shuai O(2), Xie Y(2), Wu Q(2),
Chen D(2), Yuan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Drug Research and Development, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University,
Guangzhou, 510006, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Applied Microbiology Southern China, Guangdong Academy
of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510070, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Microbial Culture Collection and
Application, Guangdong Open Laboratory of Applied Microbiology, Guangdong
Institute of Microbiology, Guangdong Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510070,
China.

Previous research has shown that the extracts from the Ganoderma lucidum spore
(GS) have potentially cardioprotective effects, but there is still abundant room 
for development in determining its mechanism. In this study, the rat model of
cardiac dysfunction was established by intraperitoneal injection of
trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), and the extracts of GS (oil, lipophilic
components, and polysaccharides) were given intragastrically at a dose of
50 mg/kg/day to screen the pharmacological active components of GS. After 50 days
of treatments, we found that the extraction from GS reduced the levels of total
cholesterol, triglyceride, and low-density lipoprotein; increased the levels of
high-density lipoprotein; and reduced the levels of serum TMAO when compared to
the model group (P < 0.05); especially the GS polysaccharides (DT) and GS
lipophilic components (XF) exhibited decreases in serum TMAO compared to
TMAO-induced control. The results of 16S rRNA sequencing showed that GS could
change the gut microbiota, increasing the abundance of Firmicutes and
Proteobacteria in the DT-treated group and XF-treated group, while reducing the
abundance of Actinobacteria and Tenericutes. Quantitative proteomics analysis
showed that GS extracts (DT and XF) could regulate the expression of some related
proteins, such as Ucp1 (XF-TMAO/M-TMAO ratio is 2.76), Mpz (8.52), Fasn (2.39),
Nefl (1.85), Mtnd5 (0.83), Mtnd2 (0.36), S100a8 (0.69), S100a9 (0.70), and Bdh1
(0.72). The results showed that XF can maintain the metabolic balance and
function of the heart by regulating the expression of some proteins related to
cardiovascular disease, and DT can reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases by 
targeting gut microbiota.

© 2021 Institute of Food Technologists®.

DOI: 10.1111/1750-3841.15575 
PMID: 33438268 

