
1. Chemistry. 2021 Mar 12;27(15):4955-4963. doi: 10.1002/chem.202005060. Epub 2021
Feb 11.

Self-Assembled Binaphthyl-Bridged Amphiphilic AABB Phthalocyanines:
Nanostructures for Efficient Antimicrobial Photodynamic Therapy.

Revuelta-Maza MÁ(1), de Las Heras E(2), Agut M(2), Nonell S(2), Torres
T(1)(3)(4), de la Torre G(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, C/ Francisco Tomás y Valiente 7, 28049,
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Institut Químic de Sarrià, Universitat Ramon Llull, 08017, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Institute for Advanced Research in Chemical Sciences (IAdChem), Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, 28049, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Instituto Madrileño de Estudios Avanzados (IMDEA)-Nanociencia, C/ Faraday 9,
Cantoblanco, 28049, Madrid, Spain.

Herein, the photodynamic activity of phthalocyanine (pc)-assembled nanoparticles 
against bacterial strains is demonstrated. The photosensitizers (PS) studied in
this work are two chiral ZnII Pcs (PS-1 and PS-2), with an AABB geometry (where A
and B refer to differently substituted isoindole constituents). They contain
differently functionalized, chiral binaphthyloxy-linked A isoindole units, which 
determine the hydrophobicity of the system, and cationic methyl pyridinium
moieties in the other two isoindoles to embody hydrophilicity. Both compounds
have the ability to self-assemble into nanoparticles in aqueous media and have
proved efficient in the photo-inactivation of Staphylococcus aureus and
Escherichia coli, selected as models of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
The average size of the nanoparticles was determined by substitution at the
binaphthyl core and, in turn, influences the toxicity of the PS. Thus, PS-1,
presenting a nonsubstituted binaphthyl core, forms larger nanoparticles with a
larger cationic surface than the octyl-functionalized PS-2. Although both PSs
present similar structure and photophysical features, the self-assembled
nanostructures of PS-1 are more effective at killing both types of strain,
showing an outstanding photo-inactivation capacity with the Gram-negative
E. coli.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.202005060 
PMID: 33442909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

