
1. Cytometry A. 2021 Jan 17. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.24304. [Epub ahead of print]

Kinetics of activation marker expression after in vitro polyclonal stimulation of
chicken peripheral T cells.

Naghizadeh M(1), Hatamzade N(2), Larsen FT(1), Kjaerup RB(1), Wattrang E(3),
Dalgaard TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Aarhus University, Tjele, Denmark.
(2)Department of Poultry Science, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Microbiology, National Veterinary Institute, Uppsala, Sweden.

A comprehensive analysis of T cell activation markers in chicken is lacking.
Kinetics of T cell activation markers (CD25, CD28, CD5, MHC-II, CD44, and CD45)
in response to in vitro stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells with
concanavalin A (Con A) were evaluated between two chicken lines selected for high
and low levels of mannose-binding lectin in serum (L10H and L10L, respectively)
by flow cytometry. L10H chickens showed a stronger response to Con A based on the
frequency of T cell blasts in both the CD4+ and CD8+ compartment. The majority of
the proliferating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells expressed CD25. Proliferating T cells
were seen both in the CD4+  MHC-II+/- and CD8+  MHC-II+/- population. For both
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, frequencies of CD25+ and MHC-II+ T cells were increased
24 h after stimulation. CD28+ frequencies were only increased on CD8+ T cells
48 h after stimulation. An increase in the relative surface expression based on
mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) upon activation was observed for most markers
except CD5. For CD4+ T cells, CD28 expression increased 24 h after stimulation
whereas MHC-II expression increased after 48 h. For CD8+ T cells, a tendency
toward an increase in CD25 expression was observed. CD28 expression started to
increase 24 h after stimulation and only a transient peak in MHC-II expression on
CD8+ T cells was observed after 24 h. CD44 and CD45 expressed on CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells increased 24-72 h after stimulation. In summary, the frequency of CD25+ and
MHC-II+ T cells were shown to be early markers (24 h) for in vitro activation of 
both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Frequency of CD28+ T cells was a later marker (48 h) 
and only for CD8+ T cells. Surface expression of all markers (MFI) increased
permanently or transiently upon activation except for CD5.

© 2021 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

DOI: 10.1002/cyto.a.24304 
PMID: 33455046 

