
1. Am J Pathol. 2021 Apr;191(4):759-771. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2021.01.002. Epub
2021 Jan 14.

Host Cxcr2-Dependent Regulation of Pancreatic Cancer Growth, Angiogenesis, and
Metastasis.

Purohit A(1), Saxena S(1), Varney M(2), Prajapati DR(1), Kozel JA(1), Lazenby
A(1), Singh RK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska.
(3)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska. Electronic address: rsingh@unmc.edu.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) manifests aggressive tumor growth and
early metastasis. Crucial steps in tumor growth and metastasis are survival,
angiogenesis, invasion, and immunosuppression. Our prior research showed that
chemokine CXC- receptor-2 (CXCR2) is expressed on endothelial cells, innate
immune cells, and fibroblasts, and regulates angiogenesis and immune responses.
Here, we examined whether tumor angiogenesis, growth, and metastasis of CXCR2
ligands expressing PDAC cells are regulated in vivo by a host CXCR2-dependent
mechanism. C57BL6 Cxcr2-/- mice were generated following crosses between Cxcr2-/+
female and Cxcr2-/- male. Cxcr2 ligands expressing Kirsten rat sarcoma
(KRAS-PDAC) cells were orthotopically implanted in the pancreas of wild-type or
Cxcr2-/- C57BL6 mice. No significant difference in PDAC tumor growth was
observed. Host Cxcr2 loss led to an inhibition in microvessel density in PDAC
tumors. Interestingly, an enhanced spontaneous and experimental liver metastasis 
was observed in Cxcr2-/- mice compared with wild-type mice. Increased metastasis 
in Cxcr2-/- mice was associated with an increase in extramedullary hematopoiesis 
and expansion of neutrophils and immature myeloid precursor cells in the spleen
of tumor-bearing mice. These data suggest a dynamic role of host CXCR2 axis in
regulating tumor immune suppression, tumor growth, and metastasis.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2021.01.002 
PMID: 33453178 

