
1. Am J Pathol. 2021 Apr;191(4):669-685. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.12.013. Epub
2021 Jan 14.

Administration of a CXC Chemokine Receptor 2 (CXCR2) Antagonist, SCH527123,
Together with Oseltamivir Suppresses NETosis and Protects Mice from Lethal
Influenza and Piglets from Swine-Influenza Infection.

Ashar HK(1), Pulavendran S(1), Rudd JM(1), Maram P(1), Achanta M(1), Chow VTK(2),
Malayer JR(1), Snider TA(1), Teluguakula N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Veterinary Health Sciences, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
Oklahoma.
(2)National University Health System Infectious Diseases Translational Research
Program, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Center for Veterinary Health Sciences, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
Oklahoma. Electronic address: narasa@okstate.edu.

Excessive neutrophil influx, their released neutrophil extracellular traps
(NETs), and extracellular histones are associated with disease severity in
influenza-infected patients. Neutrophil chemokine receptor CXC chemokine receptor
2 (CXCR2) is a critical target for suppressing neutrophilic inflammation. Herein,
temporal dynamics of neutrophil activity and NETosis were investigated to
determine the optimal timing of treatment with the CXCR2 antagonist, SCH527123
(2-hydroxy-N,N-dimethyl-3-[2-([(R)-1-(5-methyl-furan-2-yl)-propyl]amino)-3,4-diox
o-cyclobut-1-enylamino]-benzamide), and its efficacy together with antiviral
agent, oseltamivir, was tested in murine and piglet influenza-pneumonia models.
SCH527123 plus oseltamivir markedly improved survival of mice infected with
lethal influenza, and diminished lung pathology in swine-influenza-infected
piglets. Mechanistically, addition of SCH527123 in the combination treatment
attenuated neutrophil influx, NETosis, in both mice and piglets. Furthermore,
neutrophils isolated from influenza-infected mice showed greater susceptibility
to NETotic death when stimulated with a CXCR2 ligand, IL-8. In addition, CXCR2
stimulation induced nuclear translocation of neutrophil elastase, and enhanced
citrullination of histones that triggers chromatin decondensation during NET
formation. Studies on temporal dynamics of neutrophils and NETs during influenza 
thus provide important insights into the optimal timing of CXCR2 antagonist
treatment for attenuating neutrophil-mediated lung pathology. These findings
reveal that pharmacologic treatment with CXCR2 antagonist together with an
antiviral agent could significantly ameliorate morbidity and mortality in
virulent and sublethal influenza infections.

Copyright Â© 2021 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.12.013 
PMID: 33453177 

