
1. Vet Sci. 2021 Jan 15;8(1). pii: 10. doi: 10.3390/vetsci8010010.

Screening of Cyanide-Utilizing Bacteria from Rumen and In Vitro Evaluation of
Fresh Cassava Root Utilization with Pellet Containing High Sulfur Diet.

Prachumchai R(1), Cherdthong A(1), Wanapat M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002,
Thailand.

Two experiments were undertaken to screen for ruminal cyanide-utilizing bacteria 
(Experiment 1), and to evaluate the influence of fresh cassava root (FCR) and
pellets containing high sulfur (PELFUR) on cyanide content, gas production
parameters, in vitro degradability, and ruminal fermentation (Experiment 2).
Experiment 1 was conducted in a completely randomized design (CRD) for the
screening of cyanide-utilizing bacteria and the dietary treatments consisted of
cyanide at 0, 150, 300, and 450 ppm. In Experiment 2, a 5 Ã— 3 factorial
arrangement in a completely randomized design was used for the in vitro study.
Factor A was the level of FCR at 0, 260, 350, 440, and 530 g/kg of dry matter
(DM) substrate, and factor B was the level of PELFUR at 0, 15, and 30 g/kg DM
substrate. In Experiment 1, adding different doses of cyanide significantly
affected cyanide-utilizing rumen bacterial growth (p < 0.05). Increasing the
concentration of cyanide from 0 to 150 and 150 to 300 ppm resulted in increases
in cyanide-utilizing rumen bacteria of 38.2% and 15.0%, respectively. In
Experiment 2, no interaction effects were found between FCR and PELFUR doses on
gas production parameters (p > 0.05). Increasing the FCR level to more than 260
g/kg of DM substrate could increase cumulative gas production (p < 0.05).
Increasing doses of PELFUR from 15 to 30 g/kg increased the cumulative gas
production when compared with that of 0 g PELFUR/kg of DM substrate (p < 0.05).
The cyanide concentration in rumen fluid decreased with PELFUR (p < 0.05)
supplementation. Degradability of in vitro DM and organic matter following
incubation increased at 12 and 24 h due to PELFUR supplementation with FCR and
increased additionally with 15 g PELFUR/kg of DM substrate (p < 0.05) in 440 g
FCR/kg of DM substrate. Proportions of the total volatile fatty acids, acetic
acid (C2), propionic acid (C3), and butyric acid among supplementations with FCR 
(p < 0.05) were significantly different. In conclusion, the present results
represent the first finding of bacteria in the rumen that are capable of
utilizing cyanide, and suggests that cyanide might function as a nitrogen source 
for bacterial cell synthesis. The inclusion of FCR of 530 g/kg with 30 g
PELFUR/kg of DM substrate could increase the cumulative gas production, the
bacterial population, the in vitro degradability, the proportion of C3, and the
rate of the disappearance of cyanide.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci8010010 
PMCID: PMC7830276
PMID: 33467596 

