
1. Mycorrhiza. 2021 Mar;31(2):149-159. doi: 10.1007/s00572-020-01012-3. Epub 2021
Jan 21.

Distribution of plant mycorrhizal traits along an elevational gradient does not
fully mirror the latitudinal gradient.

Bueno CG(1), Gerz M(2), Moora M(2), Leon D(2), Gomez-Garcia D(3), de Leon DG(4), 
Font X(5), Al-Quraishy S(6), Hozzein WN(6)(7), Zobel M(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Tartu, Lai 40, 51005,
Tartu, Estonia. cgbuenog@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Tartu, Lai 40, 51005,
Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Pyrenean Institute of Ecology (IPE-CSIC), Av. Ntra. Sra. de la Victoria, S/N, 
22700, Jaca, Spain.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, University of Alcalá, Alcalá de Henares, 28805,
Spain.
(5)Plant Biodiversity Resource Centre, University of Barcelona, Carrer de Baldiri
Reixac 2, 08028, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Zoology Department, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, 11451,
Saudi Arabia.
(7)Botany and Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, Beni-Suef University, 
Beni-Suef, Egypt.

The influence of mycorrhizal symbiosis on ecosystem processes depends on the
mycorrhizal type and status of plants. Early research hypothesized that the
proportion of arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) species decreases and of
ectomycorrhizal (ECM) and ericoid mycorrhizal (ERM) species increases along
increasing elevations and latitudes. However, there is very scarce information
about this pattern along elevation gradients. We aimed to test this hypothesis
and to describe the trends in plant mycorrhizal status by examining the Pyrenean 
mountain range (from 400 to 3400 m asl). The distribution of plant mycorrhizal
types: AM, ECM, ERM, and non-mycorrhizal (NM) and status (obligately, OM, or
facultatively, FM mycorrhizal plants, FM) were identified based on the Pyrenean
Floristic Atlas and analyzed for climatic and edaphic drivers. The proportion of 
AM plants decreased slightly with elevation, while ECM species peaked at 1000 m
asl. The proportion of ERM and NM plant species rose with increasing elevation.
The proportion of FM species increased, and OM species decreased with increasing 
elevation. The change of AM and ECM species, and OM and FM species, along the
elevational gradient, corresponds broadly to changes along the latitudinal
gradient, driven by a combination of climatic and edaphic factors. Differently,
the elevational occurrence of NM plant species is mainly driven only by climatic 
factors (low temperature) and that of ERM species by only edaphic factors (low
pH). Large-scale macroecological studies (≥ 50 km grid cell) well reflect the
effects of climate on the distribution of plant mycorrhizal traits, but local
data (≤ 1 km grid cell) are needed to understand the effects of soil conditions
and land use.

DOI: 10.1007/s00572-020-01012-3 
PMID: 33475799  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

