
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Feb 22;49(3):1383-1396. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab002.

Super-enhancer mediated regulation of adult β-globin gene expression: the role of
eRNA and Integrator.

Gurumurthy A(1), Yu DT(1), Stees JR(1), Chamales P(1), Gavrilova E(1), Wassel
P(1), Li L(1), Stribling D(1)(2), Chen J(3), Brackett M(1), Ishov AM(4), Xie
M(1), Bungert J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Epigenetics,
Genetics Institute, UF Health Cancer Center, Powell-Gene Therapy
Center, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(3)Department of Statistics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, UF Health Cancer Center, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32610, USA.

Super-enhancers (SEs) mediate high transcription levels of target genes. Previous
studies have shown that SEs recruit transcription complexes and generate enhancer
RNAs (eRNAs). We characterized transcription at the human and murine β-globin
locus control region (LCR) SE. We found that the human LCR is capable of
recruiting transcription complexes independently from linked globin genes in
transgenic mice. Furthermore, LCR hypersensitive site 2 (HS2) initiates the
formation of bidirectional transcripts in transgenic mice and in the endogenous
β-globin gene locus in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. HS2 3'eRNA is
relatively unstable and remains in close proximity to the globin gene locus.
Reducing the abundance of HS2 3'eRNA leads to a reduction in β-globin gene
transcription and compromises RNA polymerase II (Pol II) recruitment at the
promoter. The Integrator complex has been shown to terminate eRNA transcription. 
We demonstrate that Integrator interacts downstream of LCR HS2. Inducible
ablation of Integrator function in MEL or differentiating primary human CD34+
cells causes a decrease in expression of the adult β-globin gene and accumulation
of Pol II and eRNA at the LCR. The data suggest that transcription complexes are 
assembled at the LCR and transferred to the globin genes by mechanisms that
involve Integrator mediated release of Pol II and eRNA from the LCR.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab002 
PMCID: PMC7897481
PMID: 33476375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

