
1. New Microbes New Infect. 2020 Dec 2;39:100829. doi: 10.1016/j.nmni.2020.100829.
eCollection 2021 Jan.

Diagnostic approach for detection and identification of emerging enteric
pathogens revisited: the (Ali)arcobacter lanthieri case.

Kerkhof PJ(1), Van den Abeele AM(1)(2), Strubbe B(3), Vogelaers D(4), Vandamme
P(5), Houf K(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Public Health and Food Safety, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Microbiology, Saint-Lucas Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Saint-Lucas Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of General Internal Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium.
(5)Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology,
Faculty of Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

An immunocompetent patient without a history of recent travel or animal exposure 
developed persistent abdominal bloating and cramps without diarrhoea or fever.
Negative additional investigations excluded gastritis, infectious colitis,
inflammatory bowel disease and neoplasia, but routine stool culture detected a
Campylobacter-like organism. The isolate was obtained with use of a polycarbonate
filter technique, emphasizing the importance of culture to support and validate
the occurrence of emerging and new bacterial enteric pathogens. The ensuing
extensive laboratory examinations proved challenging in identifying this
potential pathogen. Phylogenetic marker analysis based on the 16S ribosomal RNA
and rpoB gene sequences revealed that the isolate was most closely related to
Arcobacter lanthieri and Arcobacter faecis. Subsequent analysis of a draft whole 
genome sequence assigned the isolate to A. lanthieri. We report the presence of
five virulence genes, cadF, ciaB, mviN, hecA and iroE, indicating a possible
pathogenic nature of this organism. This case demonstrated the importance of the 
use of agnostic methods for the detection of emerging pathogens in cases of
enteric disease with a wide array of gastrointestinal symptoms.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmni.2020.100829 
PMCID: PMC7803648
PMID: 33473321 

