
1. Environ Geochem Health. 2021 Jan 23. doi: 10.1007/s10653-020-00788-9. [Epub ahead
of print]

Molecular characterization of stress tolerance genes associated with D. indicus
strain under extreme environment conditions.

Dhanapal AR(1), Venkidasamy B(2), Solai Ramatchandirane P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Bharathiar University, Tamil Nadu, Coimbatore,
641046, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Sri Shakthi Institute of Engineering and
Technology, Sri Shakthi Nagar, L&T By-Pass, Chinniyampalayam, Coimbatore, 641062,
India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Bharathiar University, Tamil Nadu, Coimbatore,
641046, India. prabagaran@buc.edu.in.

Deinococcus indicus is a novel bacteria isolated from West Bengal, India known
for its UV radiation and heavy metal tolerance. Since, this organism is reported 
from a region known for heavy metal contamination and earlier investigations
demonstrated its radiation resistance, our study focused on the multiple stress
responsive and DNA repair mechanisms. Though, most of the members of the genus
Deinococcus are Gram positive cocci, D. indicus postures Gram negative rod shaped
cells. Hence, the objectives were framed precisely to understand DNA repair
pathway and stress responsive genes expression with a broader perspective. Based 
on available whole genome sequence of D. indicus, quantitative real time PCR
(qPCR) was done to determine the expression pattern of multiple stress responsive
genes upon various environmental extremities. Among them, UV responsive genes
like UvrD and UvsE showed elevated expression when subjected to UV-C radiation at
different time intervals. Similarly, when supplemented with arsenic and chromium,
ArsR and ArsB exhibited considerably higher level of expression. While all the
genes were subsequently analyzed in-silico, depicted that most of them were with 
N-glycosylation site, GPI anchor sites, N-terminal trans-membrane helix region
besides putative signal peptides. Overall, this study opined the functional
information onÂ stress tolerance genes that aid to understand the DNA damage
recovery mechanism towards elucidation of DNA repair pathways.

DOI: 10.1007/s10653-020-00788-9 
PMID: 33486627 

