
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Jan 23;18(3). pii: 1005. doi:
10.3390/ijerph18031005.

Sulfaquinoxaline Oxidation and Toxicity Reduction by Photo-Fenton Process.

Urbano VR(1)(2), Maniero MG(2), Guimarães JR(2), Del Valle LJ(1)(3), Pérez-Moya
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering Department, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Escola 
d'Enginyeria de Barcelona Est (EEBE), Av. Eduard Maristany, 16, 08019 Barcelona, 
Spain.
(2)School of Civil Engineering, Architecture and Urban Design, FEC, University of
Campinas, Unicamp, P.O. Box 6143, Campinas 13083-889, Brazil.
(3)Barcelona Research Center for Multiscale Science and Engineering, Universitat 
Politècnica de Catalunya, Escola d'Enginyeria de Barcelona Est (EEBE), 08019
Barcelona, Spain.

Sulfaquinoxaline (SQX) has been detected in environmental water samples, where
its side effects are still unknown. To the best of our knowledge, its oxidation
by Fenton and photo-Fenton processes has not been previously reported. In this
study, SQX oxidation, mineralization, and toxicity (Escherichia coli and
Staphylococcus aureus bacteria) were evaluated at two different setups:
laboratory bench (2 L) and pilot plant (15 L). The experimental design was used
to assess the influence of the presence or absence of radiation source, as well
as different H2O2 concentrations (94.1 to 261.9 mg L-1). The experimental
conditions of both setups were: SQX = 25 mg L-1, Fe(II) = 10 mg L-1, pH 2.8 ±
0.1. Fenton and photo-Fenton were suitable for SQX oxidation and experiments
resulted in higher SQX mineralization than reported in the literature. For both
setups, the best process was the photo-Fenton (178.0 mg L-1 H2O2), for which over
90% of SQX was removed, over 50% mineralization, and bacterial growth inhibition 
less than 13%. In both set-ups, the presence or absence of radiation was equally 
important for sulfaquinoxaline oxidation; however, the degradation rates at the
pilot plant were between two to four times higher than the obtained at the
laboratory bench.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18031005 
PMCID: PMC7908259
PMID: 33498745 

