
1. J Food Biochem. 2021 Feb;45(2):e13629. doi: 10.1111/jfbc.13629. Epub 2021 Jan 27.

Diets supplemented with raw and roasted pumpkin (Cucurbita pepo L) seeds improved
some biochemical parameters associated with erectile function in rats.

Akomolafe SF(1), Olasehinde TA(2)(3), Aluko BT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Ekiti State University, Ado
Ekiti, Nigeria.
(2)Nutrition and Toxicology Division, Food Technology Department, Federal
Institute of Industrial Research Oshodi, Lagos, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Fort Hare, Alice,
South Africa.

This study investigated the effect of diet supplemented with raw and roasted
pumpkin seeds on some key biochemical parameters relevant to erectile function in
corpus cavernosal tissues of male rats. Rats were fed with basal diets (NC), diet
supplemented with raw (5% and 10%) and roasted (5% and 10%) pumpkin seeds for the
evaluation of adenosine deaminase (ADA), phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE-5), arginase,
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activities, including nitric oxide level and
malondialdehyde (MDA) content. Diet supplemented with roasted pumpkin seeds
showed better PDE-5, ADA, arginase activities, as well as NO and MDA levels. No
significant difference was observed in AChE activities of rats treated with raw
and roasted pumpkin seeds. The modulatory effects of raw and roasted pumpkin
seeds on enzymes associated with erectile dysfunction suggest the biochemical
rationale for its therapeutic role in enhancing erectile function. However,
roasted pumpkin seeds (10%, w/w of diet) possess more beneficial effects than the
raw seeds. PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS: Pumpkin is a nutritious vegetable used in
folklore for the treatment of bladder, prostate, and kidney diseases. The seeds
are known to contain phenolic compounds which exert different health benefits.
Processing of foods has been shown to either improve the quality or reduce the
bioactive components which affect its functionality. In this study, roasting
improved the biochemical parameters associated with erectile function in male
rats. Roasted pumpkin seeds also reduced the oxidative stress parameters in rats'
penile tissues when compared to raw pumpkin seeds. This study revealed that
thermal processing associated with roasting could improve the antioxidant
activity of pumpkin seeds and crucial enzymes related to erectile function.
Hence, consumption of roasted pumpkin seeds could be more beneficial compared to 
raw pumpkin seeds.

Â© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jfbc.13629 
PMID: 33502019 

