
1. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 2021 Jan 31. doi: 10.1007/s12223-020-00848-8. [Epub
ahead of print]

Mass spectrometry-based identification of bacteria isolated from industrially
contaminated site in Salamanca (Mexico) and evaluation of their potential for DDT
degradation.

Garcia Lara B(1), Wrobel K(1), Corrales Escobosa AR(1), Serrano Torres O(1),
Enciso Donis I(1), Wrobel K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, Division of Natural and Exact Sciences, University of
Guanajuato, L. de Retana 5, 36000, Guanajuato, Mexico.
(2)Chemistry Department, Division of Natural and Exact Sciences, University of
Guanajuato, L. de Retana 5, 36000, Guanajuato, Mexico. kazimier@ugto.mx.

Longstanding industrial deposits of
1-chloro-4-[2,2,2-trichloro-1-(4-chlorophenyl)ethyl]benzene (DDT) impose
environmental threat in Salamanca city, located in central Mexico. Native
bacteria from this location were isolated and identified, and their potential
utility for DDT biodegradation was examined. Twenty-five isolates were obtained, 
and cell lysates were analyzed by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) with
BiotyperTR; twenty-one organisms were identified at species level, and the other 
four were assigned to genus. The most abundant species corresponded to Bacillus
(44%) and Pseudomonas genera (20%). Eight bacteria could grow in the presence of 
200 mg/L of DDT. Two-week exposure of Lysinibacillus fusiformis, Bacillus
mycoides, Bacillus pumilus, and Bacillus cereus to DDT 50 mg/L and 200 mg/L,
caused percentage pesticide degradation in the range 41-48% and 26-31%,
respectively. Other four bacteria presented lower degradation rates. Gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis of the spent media revealed
that eight isolates assisted the conversion of DDT, DDD
(1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis-(4-chlorophenyl)ethane), and DDE
(1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis-(4-chlorophenyl)ethylene) to DDMU
(1,1-(2-chloro-1,1-ethenediyl)-bis-(4-chlorobenzene)); however, DDNU
(2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethylene), DBP
(4,4'-dichlorobenzophenone(bis(4-chlorophenyl)methanone)) and DBH
(bis(4-chlorophenyl)methanol) were found only for L. fusiformis, B. mycoides, B. 
cereus, B. marisflavi, and B. megaterium. Within the context of DDT
biodegradation, the first three were the most promising isolates and further
studies will be aimed at setting the experimental conditions for efficient
mineralization of DDT congeners.

DOI: 10.1007/s12223-020-00848-8 
PMID: 33517552 

