
1. Environ Geochem Health. 2021 Jan 30. doi: 10.1007/s10653-021-00821-5. [Epub ahead
of print]

Influence of destructive bacteria and red clover (trifolium pratense L.) on the
pesticides degradation in the soil.

Nazarova EA(1), Nazarov AV(2), Egorova DO(2), Anan'ina LN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Ecology and Genetics of Microorganisms Ural Branch, Russian
Academy of Sciences, 13 Golev str, Perm, Russia, 614081. e9026309777@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Ecology and Genetics of Microorganisms Ural Branch, Russian
Academy of Sciences, 13 Golev str, Perm, Russia, 614081.

Lindane and DDT (1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane) are pesticides
from the group of persistent organic pollutants. These compounds, due to
lipophilic properties, accumulate in tissues of organisms, are transmitted
through the food chain and ultimately threaten human health. The long-term use of
pesticides led to soil and water pollution. Microbial degradation of
organochlorine compounds is the most eco-friendly method of polluted soil
recultivation. Effective degradation of lindane and DDT soil pollution under the 
influence of introduced destructive bacteria was shown in the laboratory
conditions. The concentration of lindane in the soil decreased by 75% and of
DDT-by 56% in 30Â days. The red clover seedlings increased pesticides degradation 
in the soil by 20%. The destruction of pesticides in soil was more intense than
in the mineral medium. The DGGE analysis of microorganism associations introduced
in contaminated soil was possible to follow the survival of the introduced
associations. The use of microorganisms-destructors of organochlorine compounds, 
and plants as well as the biodegradation potential of the soil is a promising
direction in the recultivation of polluted soils.

DOI: 10.1007/s10653-021-00821-5 
PMID: 33515377 

