
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2021 Mar 8;97(3). pii: fiab015. doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiab015.

An arsRB resistance operon confers tolerance to arsenite in the environmental
isolate Terribacillus sp. AE2B 122.

Escobar-Niño A(1)(2), Sánchez-Barrionuevo L(1)(2), Torres-Torres JM(1), Clemente 
R(3), Gutiérrez G(1), Mellado E(2), Cánovas D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, University of Seville, Seville,
41012, Spain.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
of Seville, Seville, 41012, Spain.
(3)CEBAS-CSIC, Campus Universitario de Espinardo, Murcia, 30100, Spain.

Terribacillus sp. AE2B 122 is an environmental strain isolated from olive-oil
agroindustry wastes. This strain displays resistance to arsenic, one of the most 
ubiquitous carcinogens found in nature. Terribacillus sp. AE2B 122 possesses an
unusual ars operon, consisting of the transcriptional regulator (arsR) and
arsenite efflux pump (arsB) but no adjacent arsenate reductase (arsC) locus.
Expression of arsR and arsB was induced when Terribacillus was exposed to
sub-lethal concentrations of arsenate. Heterologous expression of the arsB
homologue in Escherichia coli∆arsRBC demonstrated that it conferred resistance to
arsenite and reduced the accumulation of arsenic inside the cells. Two members of
the arsC-like family (Te3384 and Te2854) found in the Terribacillus genome were
not induced by arsenic, but their heterologous expression in E. coli ∆arsC and
∆arsRBC increased the accumulation of arsenic in both strains. We found that both
Te3384 and Te2854 slightly increased resistance to arsenate in E. coli ∆arsC and 
∆arsRBC, possibly by chelation of arsenic or by increasing the resistance to
oxidative stress. Finally, arsenic speciation assays suggest that Terribacillus
is incapable of arsenate reduction, in agreement with the lack of an arsC
homologue in the genome.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of FEMS.

DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiab015 
PMID: 33512483 

