
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jan 27;22(3). pii: 1250. doi: 10.3390/ijms22031250.

CD1d-Dependent iNKT Cells Control DSS-Induced Colitis in a Mouse Model of
IFNγ-Mediated Hyperinflammation by Increasing IL22-Secreting ILC3 Cells.

Park HJ(1), Lee SW(1), Van Kaer L(2), Hong S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Bioscience and Biotechnology, Institute of
Anticancer Medicine Development, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

We have previously shown that CD1d-restricted iNKT cells suppress dysregulated
IFNγ expression and intestinal inflammation in Yeti mice on the C57BL/6
background. Since type 3 innate lymphoid cells (ILC3s) in mesenteric lymph nodes 
(MLN) protect against intestinal inflammation in a CD1d-associated manner, we
investigated whether crosstalk between iNKT cells and MLN ILC3s controls
IFNγ-mediated intestinal inflammation in Yeti mice. We found that Yeti mice
display increased levels of ILC3s and that iNKT cell deficiency in Yeti/CD1d KO
mice decreases levels of IL22-producing ILC3s during DSS-induced colitis. This
finding indicates that iNKT cells and ILC3s cooperate to regulate intestinal
inflammation in Yeti mice. Yeti iNKT cells displayed a pronounced
anti-inflammatory (IL4- or IL9-producing) phenotype during colitis. Their
adoptive transfer to iNKT cell-deficient animals induced a significant increase
in IL22 production by ILC3s, indicating that crosstalk between iNKT cells and
ILC3s plays a critical role in modulating colitis in Yeti mice. Moreover, we
showed that the IL9-producing subset of iNKT cells potently enhances
IL22-producing ILC3s in vivo. Taken together, our results identify a central role
of the iNKT cell-ILC3 axis in ameliorating IFNγ-mediated intestinal inflammation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22031250 
PMCID: PMC7866066
PMID: 33513946 

