
1. J Food Biochem. 2021 Feb;45(2):e13632. doi: 10.1111/jfbc.13632. Epub 2021 Feb 1.

Protective effect of Lactobacillus plantarum YS3 on dextran sulfate
sodium-induced colitis in C57BL/6J mice.

Hu T(1), Fan Y(2), Long X(1), Pan Y(1), Mu J(1), Tan F(3), Zhao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Collaborative Innovation Center for Functional Food, Chongqing
Engineering Research Center of Functional Food, Chongqing Engineering Laboratory 
for Research and Development of Functional Food, Chongqing University of
Education, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Nutrition, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University,
Third Military Medical University), Chongqing, China.
(3)Department of Public Health, Our Lady of Fatima University, Valenzuela,
Philippines.

The protective effect of Lactobacillus plantarum YS3 (LP-YS3) on ulcerative
colitis (UC) was assessed using a mouse model of dextran sodium sulfate
(DSS)-induced colitis. Different concentrations of LP-YS4 were administered to
the experimental mice by daily gavage. Several inflammatory and biochemical
indices, such as interleukin-2 (IL-2), interleukin-10 (IL-10), interleukin-6
(IL-6), interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α),
glutathione (GSH), malondialdehyde (MDA), myeloperoxidase (MPO), and nitric oxide
(NO), were examined in mouse serum and colon tissue. The mRNA and protein
expression levels of c-Kit, CXC chemokine receptor type 2 (CXCR2), interleukin-8 
(IL-8), and stem cell factor (SCF) in mouse colon tissue were assessed using
Western blot and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) assays. The
findings indicated that LP-YS3 remarkably decreased the disease activity index
(DAI) of UC mice (p < .05), inhibited colon length shortening induced by UC, and 
elevated the value of colon weight/length ratio. LP-YS3 could also markedly
reduce (p < .05) the activities of MDA, MPO, and NO; while an increase in the GSH
content in the colonic tissue of UC mice. Moreover, LP-YS3 remarkably increased
(p < .05) the serum level of IL-2 in UC mice, while reduced those of IL-10, IL-6,
IL-1β, TNF-α cytokines. qPCR data revealed that LP-YS3 could markedly upregulate 
the expression levels of c-Kit and SCF, while downregulate those of CXCR2 and
IL-8 in the colonic tissue of UC mice (p < .05). LP-YS3 exerted an outstanding
protective effect on DSS-induced colitis in C57BL/6J mice, especially at higher
concentrations. PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS: Lactobacillus plantarum YS3 is a newly
isolated and identified lactic acid bacteria. This study confirmed that L.
plantarum YS3 can inhibit colitis and has good probiotic potential, which needs
further development and utilization.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jfbc.13632 
PMID: 33527475 

