
1. Acta Biomed. 2020 Jul 16;91(4):e2020124. doi: 10.23750/abm.v91i4.10231.

Protective face masks through centuries, from XVII century plague doctors to
current health care professionals managing the COVID-19 pandemic.

Conti AA(1).

Author information: 
(1). andrea.conti@unifi.it.

The adoption of items similar to face masks by human beings dates back to the
remote past. With specific regard to the use of face protections for medical
purposes, from the beginning of the XVII century onwards in Europe physicians in 
charge of curing patients with plague wore a complicated, and subsequently
typical, costume. The face mask included eye sockets of glass and leather
headdresses with long, pointed beaks. These beaks were filled with scented
spices, aromatic substances and perfumes to filter out the plague and to mask
"bad air", which was considered to be the vehicle of the disease. In the XVIII
and XIX centuries a number of advances regarding personal protection devices in
health care were achieved. In the course of the 1918 influenza pandemic (Spanish 
flu), health care professionals began to use face masks in a routine way to
protect themselves and their patients. From the sixties (XX century) onwards, the
explosion of health care technology has led to a continuous refinement in the
study of individual protection devices, also because, even in the presence of an 
increasing number of powerful antimicrobial agents, infectious diseases have
remained dominant during these last decades. It is not by chance, therefore, that
one of the consequences of the 2020 ongoing COVID-19 pandemic should be the fact 
that face masks have become essential again both inside and outside health care
environments. Even if more than a century has passed from Fluegge's historical
definition of bacteria-laden droplets, the role of certain medical-preventive
achievements of the past, including the paradigmatic model of protective face
masks, continues to remain pivotal in this third millennium.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v91i4.10231 
PMCID: PMC7927518
PMID: 33525231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

