
1. Nanomaterials (Basel). 2021 Feb 1;11(2). pii: 356. doi: 10.3390/nano11020356.

In-Vitro Antibacterial and Anti-Inflammatory Effects of Surfactin-Loaded
Nanoparticles for Periodontitis Treatment.

Johnson A(1), Kong F(2), Miao S(3), Thomas S(4), Ansar S(5), Kong ZL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 20224,
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA
30602, USA.
(3)Teagasc Food Research Centre, Moorepark, Fermoy, Co., Cork P61 C996, Ireland.
(4)School of Energy Studies and School of Chemical Sciences, Mahatma Gandhi
University, Priyadarshini Hills P.O., Kottayam, Kerala 686560, India.
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Saud University, P.O. Box 10219, Riyadh 11433, Saudi Arabia.

Periodontitis is an inflammatory disease associated with biofilm formation and
gingival recession. The practice of nanotechnology in the clinical field is
increased overtime due to its potential advantages in drug delivery applications.
Nanoparticles can deliver drugs into the targeted area with high efficiency and
cause less damages to the tissues. In this study, we investigated the
antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties of surfactin-loaded Îº-carrageenan 
oligosaccharides linked cellulose nanofibers (CO-CNF) nanoparticles. Three types 
of surfactin-loaded nanoparticles were prepared based on the increasing
concentration of surfactin such as 50SNPs (50 mg surfactin-loaded CO-CNF
nanoparticles), 100SNPs (100 mg surfactin-loaded CO-CNF nanoparticles), and
200SNPs (200 mg surfactin-loaded CO-CNF nanoparticles). The results showed that
the nanoparticles inhibited the growth of Fusobacterium nucleatum and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. The reduction in biofilm formation and metabolic activity of the
bacteria were confirmed by crystal violet and MTT assay, respectively. Besides,
an increase in oxidative stress was also observed in bacteria. Furthermore,
anti-inflammatory effects of surfactin-loaded CO-CNF nanoparticles was observed
in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated human gingival fibroblast (HGF) cells. A
decrease in the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), transcription
factor, and cytokines were observed in the presence of nanoparticles.
Collectively, these observations supported the use of surfactin-loaded CO-CNF as 
a potential candidate for periodontitis management.

DOI: 10.3390/nano11020356 
PMCID: PMC7912741
PMID: 33535497 

