
1. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2021 Jan 29;63:e4. doi: 10.1590/S1678-9946202163004.
eCollection 2021.

Epidemiological study in Brazilian women highlights that syphilis remains a
public health problem.

Barbosa MDS(1), Lima LA(1), Ribeiro SM(1), Croda J(2)(3), Queiroz JHFS(1),
Ortolani LG(1), Negrão FJ(1), Souza EC(1), Silva KED(1), Souza RO(1), Simionatto 
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal da Grande Dourados, Laboratório de Pesquisa em Ciências
da Saúde, Dourados, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.
(2)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Campo Grande, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul, Faculdade de Medicina, Campo
Grande, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.

Syphilis, an infectious disease considered a global public health concern, can
cause stillbirths and neonatal deaths. This highlights the importance of
continuous surveillance studies among women of reproductive age. A
cross-sectional study was carried out to analyze the prevalence and risk factors 
associated with Treponema pallidum infection in women assisted by primary health 
care units in Dourados, a city located in Mato Grosso do Sul State, Brazil, which
borders Paraguay. A questionnaire was applied to a population-based sample, blood
samples were collected for syphilis testing and multivariable analyses were
performed to screen associations with T. pallidum infection. The prevalence of T.
pallidum infection was 6.04%. Bivariate analysis showed that women referring
multiple sexual partners (c2: 6.97 [p=0.014]), income less 2 minimal wages (c2:
15.93 [p=0.003]), who did not have high school (c2: 12.64 [p=0.005]), and
reporting history of STIs (c2: 7.30 [p=0.018]) are more likely to have syphilis. 
In the multivariate analysis, a highest prevalence ratio was observed in women
with income less than 2 minimal wages (PR: 0.96 [95% CI: 0.85 - 0.97]), and who
did not have high school (PR: 0.94 [95% CI: 0.90 - 0.98]). In addition, 80% of
the women reported irregular use of condoms and 63.89% declared having sexual
intercourses with multiple partners, which creates more opportunities for the
transmission of the infection. These results highlight the need for healthcare
systems to implement initiatives to monitor syphilis screening and the commitment
of patients and their sexual partners to the treatment in order to achieve a
decrease of new cases.

DOI: 10.1590/S1678-9946202163004 
PMCID: PMC7845940
PMID: 33533807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

