
1. PLoS One. 2021 Feb 5;16(2):e0246598. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0246598.
eCollection 2021.

Characterization of Arcobacter spp. Isolated from human diarrheal, non-diarrheal 
and food samples in Thailand.

Kietsiri P(1)(2), Muangnapoh C(2), Lurchachaiwong W(1), Lertsethtakarn P(1),
Bodhidatta L(1), Suthienkul O(2), Waters NC(1), Demons ST(1), Vesely BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacterial and Parasitic Diseases, Armed Forces Research
Institute of Medical Sciences (AFRIMS), Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Public Health, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

Arcobacter butzleri is an emerging zoonotic food-borne and water-borne pathogen
that can cause diarrhea in humans. The global prevalence of A. butzleri infection
is underestimated, and little is known about their phenotypic and genotypic
characterization. The aim of this study was to determine antimicrobial
susceptibility (AST) profiles, detect related virulence genes, and classify
sequence type (ST) of A. butzleri isolates obtained from human stool and food
samples. A total of 84 A. butzleri isolates were obtained from human diarrheal (n
= 25), non-diarrheal (n = 24) stool, and food (n = 35) samples in Thailand. They 
were evaluated for phenotypic identification by conventional microbiological
procedures and AST by Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion method as well as virulence
genes detection. Representative isolates from each origin were selected based on 
the presence of virulence genes and AST profiles to analyze genetic diversity by 
multilocus sequence typing (MLST). All isolates showed resistance to nalidixic
acid 40.5% (34/84), ciprofloxacin 11.9% (10/84), azithromycin 8.3% (7/84), and
erythromycin 3.6% (3/84). Regarding the ten virulence genes detected, cj1349,
mviN and pldA had the highest prevalence 100% (84/84), followed by tlyA 98.8%
(83/84), cadF 97.6% (82/84), ciaB 71.4% (60/84), hecA and hecB 22.6% (19/84),
iroE 15.5% (13/84) and irgA 10.7% (9/84), respectively. Three virulence genes
were present among A. butzleri isolates of human diarrheal stool and food
samples, with a significant difference observed among isolates; hecB [36% (9/25) 
and 8.6% (3/35)], hecA [36% (9/25) and 5.7% (2/35)], and irgA [24% (6/25) and
2.9% (1/35)] (p < 0.05), respectively. The hecA and hecB virulence genes
functions are related to the mechanism of hemolysis, while irgA supports a
bacterial nutritional requirement. MLST analysis of 26 A. butzleri isolates
revealed that 16 novel STs exhibited high genetic diversity. The results of this 
study is useful for understanding potentially pathogenic and
antimicrobial-resistant A. butzleri in Thailand. The pathogenic virulence markers
hecB, hecA, and irgA have the potential to be developed for rapid diagnostic
detection in human diarrheal stool. No significant relationships among STs and
sources of origin were observed. Little is known about A. butzleri, the mechanism
of action of these virulence genes, is a topic that needs further investigation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0246598 
PMCID: PMC7864401
PMID: 33544770 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

