
1. Funct Integr Genomics. 2021 Mar;21(2):171-193. doi: 10.1007/s10142-021-00768-x.
Epub 2021 Feb 6.

Whole-genome sequencing, genome mining, metabolic reconstruction and evolution of
pentachlorophenol and other xenobiotic degradation pathways in Bacillus tropicus 
strain AOA-CPS1.

Aregbesola OA(1), Kumar A(1), Mokoena MP(1), Olaniran AO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture,
Engineering and Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal (Westville Campus), Private 
Bag X54001, Durban, 4000, Republic of South Africa.
(2)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture,
Engineering and Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal (Westville Campus), Private 
Bag X54001, Durban, 4000, Republic of South Africa. olanirana@ukzn.ac.za.

A pentachlorophenol degrading bacterium was isolated from effluent of a
wastewater treatment plant in Durban, South Africa, and identified as Bacillus
tropicus strain AOA-CPS1 (BtAOA). The isolate degraded 29% of pentachlorophenol
(PCP) within 9 days at an initial PCP concentration of 100 mg L-1 and 62% of PCP 
when the initial concentration was set at 350 mg L-1. The whole-genome of BtAOA
was sequenced using Pacific Biosciences RS II sequencer with the Single Molecule,
Real-Time (SMRT) Link (version 7.0.1.66975) and analysed using the HGAP4-de-novo 
assembly application. The contigs were annotated at NCBI, RASTtk and PROKKA
prokaryotic genome annotation pipelines. The BtAOA genome is comprised of a
5,246,860-bp chromosome and a 58,449-bp plasmid with a GC content of 35.4%. The
metabolic reconstruction for BtAOA showed that the organism has been naturally
exposed to various chlorophenolic compounds including PCP and other xenobiotics. 
The chromosome encodes genes for core processes, stress response and PCP
catabolic genes. Analogues of PCP catabolic gene (cpsBDCAE, and p450) sequences
were identified from the NCBI annotation data, PCR-amplified from the whole
genome of BtAOA, cloned into pET15b expression vector, overexpressed in E. coli
BL21 (DE3) expression host, purified and characterized. Sequence mining and
comparative analysis of the metabolic reconstruction of the BtAOA genome with
closely related strains suggests that the operon encoding the first two enzymes
in the PCP degradation pathway were acquired from a pre-existing
pterin-carbinolamine dehydratase subsystem. The other two enzymes were recruited 
via horizontal gene transfer (HGT) from the pool of hypothetical proteins with no
previous specific function, while the last enzyme was recruited from pre-existing
enzymes from the TCA or serine-glyoxalase cycle via HGT events. This study
provides a comprehensive understanding of the role of BtAOA in PCP degradation
and its potential exploitation for bioremediation of other xenobiotic compounds.

DOI: 10.1007/s10142-021-00768-x 
PMID: 33547987 

