
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Feb 4;22(4). pii: 1549. doi: 10.3390/ijms22041549.

De Novo PORCN and ZIC2 Mutations in a Highly Consanguineous Family.

Castilla-Vallmanya L(1), Gürsoy S(2), Giray-Bozkaya Ö(3), Prat-Planas A(1),
Bullich G(4), Matalonga L(4), Centeno-Pla M(1), Rabionet R(1), Grinberg D(1),
Balcells S(1), Urreizti R(1).

Author information: 
(1)IBUB, IRSJD, and CIBERER (ISCIII), Department of Genetics, Microbiology and
Statistics, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Dr. Behcet Uz Children's Hospital, Izmir
35210, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylul University,
Izmir 35340, Turkey.
(4)CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science 
and Technology (BIST), 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

We present a Turkish family with two cousins (OC15 and OC15b) affected with
syndromic developmental delay, microcephaly, and trigonocephaly but with some
phenotypic traits distinct between them. OC15 showed asymmetrical skeletal
defects and syndactyly, while OC15b presented with a more severe microcephaly and
semilobal holoprosencephaly. All four progenitors were related and OC15 parents
were consanguineous. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) analysis was performed on
patient OC15 as a singleton and on the OC15b trio. Selected variants were
validated by Sanger sequencing. We did not identify any shared variant that could
be associated with the disease. Instead, each patient presented a de novo
heterozygous variant in a different gene. OC15 carried a nonsense mutation
(p.Arg95*) in PORCN, which is a gene responsible for Goltz-Gorlin syndrome, while
OC15b carried an indel mutation in ZIC2 leading to the substitution of three
residues by a proline (p.His404_Ser406delinsPro). Autosomal dominant mutations in
ZIC2 have been associated with holoprosencephaly 5. Both variants are absent in
the general population and are predicted to be pathogenic. These two de novo
heterozygous variants identified in the two patients seem to explain the major
phenotypic alterations of each particular case, instead of a homozygous variant
that would be expected by the underlying consanguinity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22041549 
PMCID: PMC7913830
PMID: 33557041 

