
1. G3 (Bethesda). 2021 Jan 18;11(1). pii: jkaa024. doi: 10.1093/g3journal/jkaa024.

In vivo transcriptome analysis provides insights into host-dependent expression
of virulence factors by Yersinia entomophaga MH96, during infection of Galleria
mellonella.

Paulson AR(1)(2)(3), O'Callaghan M(1), Zhang XX(4), Rainey PB(2)(5)(6), Hurst
MRH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Forage Science, AgResearch Ltd., Lincoln 8140, New Zealand.
(2)New Zealand Institute for Advanced Study, Massey University, Auckland 0745,
New Zealand.
(3)Department of Biology, Queen's University, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada.
(4)School of Natural and Computational Sciences, Massey University, Auckland
0745, New Zealand.
(5)Laboratoire de Génétique de l'Evolution CBI, ESPCI Paris, Université PSL,
CNRS, Paris 75005, France.
(6)Department of Microbial Population Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Evolutionary Biology, Plön 24306, Germany.

The function of microbes can be inferred from knowledge of genes specifically
expressed in natural environments. Here, we report the in vivo transcriptome of
the entomopathogenic bacterium Yersinia entomophaga MH96, captured during
initial, septicemic, and pre-cadaveric stages of intrahemocoelic infection in
Galleria mellonella. A total of 1285 genes were significantly upregulated by MH96
during infection; 829 genes responded to in vivo conditions during at least one
stage of infection, 289 responded during two stages of infection, and 167
transcripts responded throughout all three stages of infection compared to in
vitro conditions at equivalent cell densities. Genes upregulated during the
earliest infection stage included components of the insecticidal toxin complex
Yen-TC (chi1, chi2, and yenC1), genes for rearrangement hotspot element
containing protein yenC3, cytolethal distending toxin cdtAB, and vegetative
insecticidal toxin vip2. Genes more highly expressed throughout the infection
cycle included the putative heat-stable enterotoxin yenT and three adhesins
(usher-chaperone fimbria, filamentous hemagglutinin, and an AidA-like secreted
adhesin). Clustering and functional enrichment of gene expression data also
revealed expression of genes encoding type III and VI secretion system-associated
effectors. Together these data provide insight into the pathobiology of MH96 and 
serve as an important resource supporting efforts to identify novel insecticidal 
agents.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Genetics 
Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/g3journal/jkaa024 
PMCID: PMC7849909
PMID: 33561230 

