
1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2021 Feb 10;10(2). pii: 270. doi: 10.3390/antiox10020270.

Mechanisms of Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease in the Metabolic Syndrome. A
Narrative Review.

Rinaldi L(1), Pafundi PC(1), Galiero R(1), Caturano A(1), Morone MV(2), Silvestri
C(1), Giordano M(1), Salvatore T(3), Sasso FC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Campania
Luigi Vanvitelli, Piazza Luigi Miraglia 2, 80138 Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Microbiology, University of
Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Piazza Luigi Miraglia 2, 80138 Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Via
De Crecchio 7, 80138 Naples, Italy.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and metabolic syndrome (MS) are two
different entities sharing common clinical and physio-pathological features, with
insulin resistance (IR) as the most relevant. Large evidence leads to consider it
as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease, regardless of age, sex, smoking
habit, cholesterolemia, and other elements of MS. Therapeutic strategies remain
still unclear, but lifestyle modifications (diet, physical exercise, and weight
loss) determine an improvement in IR, MS, and both clinical and histologic liver 
picture. NAFLD and IR are bidirectionally correlated and, consequently, the
development of pre-diabetes and diabetes is the most direct consequence at the
extrahepatic level. In turn, type 2 diabetes is a well-known risk factor for
multiorgan damage, including an involvement of cardiovascular system, kidney and 
peripheral nervous system. The increased MS incidence worldwide, above all due to
changes in diet and lifestyle, is associated with an equally significant increase
in NAFLD, with a subsequent rise in both morbidity and mortality due to both
metabolic, hepatic and cardiovascular diseases. Therefore, the slowdown in the
increase of the "bad company" constituted by MS and NAFLD, with all the
consequent direct and indirect costs, represents one of the main challenges for
the National Health Systems.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox10020270 
PMCID: PMC7916383
PMID: 33578702 

