
1. Cells. 2021 Jan 30;10(2). pii: 279. doi: 10.3390/cells10020279.

Aging and Microglial Response following Systemic Stimulation with Escherichia
coli in Mice.

Hoogland ICM(1), Westhoff D(1), Engelen-Lee JY(1), Valls Seron M(1),
Houben-Weerts JHMP(1), van Westerloo DJ(2), van der Poll T(3), van Gool WA(1),
van de Beek D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Amsterdam UMC, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(2)Intensive Care Medicine, Leiden University Medical Centre, Albinusdreef 2,
2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam Infection and Immunity Institute, Meibergdreef 5, 1105
AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Systemic infection is an important risk factor for the development cognitive
impairment and neurodegeneration in older people. Animal experiments show that
systemic challenges with live bacteria cause a neuro-inflammatory response, but
the effect of age on this response in these models is unknown. Young (2 months)
and middle-aged mice (13-14 months) were intraperitoneally challenged with live
Escherichia coli (E. coli) or saline. The mice were sacrificed at 2, 3 and 7 days
after inoculation; for all time points, the mice were treated with ceftriaxone
(an antimicrobial drug) at 12 and 24 h after inoculation. Microglial response was
monitored by immunohistochemical staining with an ionized calcium-binding adaptor
molecule 1 (Iba-1) antibody and flow cytometry, and inflammatory response by mRNA
expression of pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators. We observed an increased
microglial cell number and moderate morphologically activated microglial cells in
middle-aged mice, as compared to young mice, after intraperitoneal challenge with
live E. coli. Flow cytometry of microglial cells showed higher CD45 and CD11b
expressions in middle-aged infected mice compared to young infected mice. The
brain expression levels of pro-inflammatory genes were higher in middle-aged than
in young infected mice, while middle-aged infected mice had similar expression
levels of these genes in the systemic compartment. We conclude that systemic
challenge with live bacteria causes an age-dependent neuro-inflammatory and
microglial response. Our data show signs of an age-dependent disconnection of the
inflammatory transcriptional signature between the brain and the systemic
compartment.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10020279 
PMCID: PMC7912649
PMID: 33573322 

