
1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Feb 15:100419. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100419. [Epub ahead of
print]

Heparan sulfate is essential for thymus growth.

Hsu HP(1), Chen YT(1), Chen YY(1), Lin CY(1), Chen PY(1), Liao SY(1), Lim CCY(1),
Yamaguchi Y(2), Hsu CL(1), Dzhagalov IL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: ivan.dzhagalov@ym.edu.tw.

Thymus organogenesis and T cell development are coordinated by various soluble
and cell-bound molecules. Heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans can interact with
and immobilize many soluble mediators, creating fields or gradients of secreted
ligands. While the role of HS in the development of many organs has been studied 
extensively, little is known about its function in the thymus. Here, we examined 
the distribution of HS in the thymus and the effect of its absence on thymus
organogenesis and T cell development. We found that HS was expressed most
abundantly on the thymic fibroblasts and at lower levels on endothelial,
epithelial, and hematopoietic cells. To study the function of HS in the thymus,
we eliminated most of HS in this organ by genetically disrupting the
glycosyltransferase Ext1 that is essential for its synthesis. The absence of HS
greatly reduced the size of the thymus in fetal thymic organ cultures and in
vivo, in mice, and decreased the production of T cells. However, no specific
blocks in T cell development were observed. Wild type thymic fibroblasts were
able to physically bind the homeostatic chemokines CCL19, CCL21, and CXCL12 ex
vivo. However, this binding was abolished upon HS degradation, disrupting the
CCL19/CCL21 chemokine gradients, and causing impaired migration of dendritic
cells in thymic slices. Thus, our results show that HS plays an essential role in
the development and growth of the thymus and in regulating interstitial cell
migration.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100419 
PMCID: PMC7974028
PMID: 33600795 

