
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Feb 19;11(1):4268. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-83531-3.

Elevated inflammatory responses and targeted therapeutic intervention in a
preclinical mouse model of ataxia-telangiectasia lung disease.

Saunders RA(#)(1), Michniacki TF(#)(2), Hames C(3), Moale HA(1), Wilke C(4), Kuo 
ME(3), Nguyen J(3), Hartlerode AJ(5), Moore BB(1)(4), Sekiguchi JM(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, 109 Zina Pitcher
Place, 2063 BSRB, Box 2200, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, 109 Zina Pitcher
Place, 2063 BSRB, Box 2200, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. sekiguch@med.umich.edu.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
sekiguch@med.umich.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive, multisystem disorder
characterized by cerebellar degeneration, cancer predisposition, and immune
system defects. A major cause of mortality in A-T patients is severe pulmonary
disease; however, the underlying causes of the lung complications are poorly
understood, and there are currently no curative therapeutic interventions. In
this study, we examined the lung phenotypes caused by ATM-deficient immune cells 
using a mouse model of A-T pulmonary disease. In response to acute lung injury,
ATM-deficiency causes decreased survival, reduced blood oxygen saturation,
elevated neutrophil recruitment, exaggerated and prolonged inflammatory responses
and excessive lung injury compared to controls. We found that ATM null bone
marrow adoptively transferred to WT recipients induces similar phenotypes that
culminate in impaired lung function. Moreover, we demonstrated that activated
ATM-deficient macrophages exhibit significantly elevated production of harmful
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species and pro-inflammatory cytokines. These
findings indicate that ATM-deficient immune cells play major roles in causing the
lung pathologies in A-T. Based on these results, we examined the impact of
inhibiting the aberrant inflammatory responses caused by ATM-deficiency with
reparixin, a CXCR1/CXCR2 chemokine receptor antagonist. We demonstrated that
reparixin treatment reduces neutrophil recruitment, edema and tissue damage in
ATM mutant lungs. Thus, our findings indicate that targeted inhibition of
CXCR1/CXCR2 attenuates pulmonary phenotypes caused by ATM-deficiency and suggest 
that this treatment approach represents a viable therapeutic strategy for A-T
lung disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-83531-3 
PMCID: PMC7895952
PMID: 33608602 

