
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Feb 5;12:628269. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.628269.
eCollection 2021.

Burkholderiaceae Are Key Acetate Assimilators During Complete Denitrification in 
Acidic Cryoturbated Peat Circles of the Arctic Tundra.

Hetz SA(1), Horn MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

Cryoturbated peat circles (pH 4) in the Eastern European Tundra harbor up to 2 mM
pore water nitrate and emit the greenhouse gas N2O like heavily fertilized
agricultural soils in temperate regions. The main process yielding N2O under
oxygen limited conditions is denitrification, which is the sequential reduction
of nitrate/nitrite to N2O and/or N2. N2O reduction to N2 is impaired by pH < 6 in
classical model denitrifiers and many environments. Key microbes of peat circles 
are important but largely unknown catalysts for C- and N-cycling associated N2O
fluxes. Thus, we hypothesized that the peat circle community includes hitherto
unknown taxa and is essentially unable to efficiently perform complete
denitrification, i.e., reduce N2O, due to a low in situ pH. 16S rRNA analysis
indicated a diverse active community primarily composed of the bacterial
class-level taxa Alphaproteobacteria, Acidimicrobiia, Acidobacteria,
Verrucomicrobiae, and Bacteroidia, as well as archaeal Nitrososphaeria.
Euryarchaeota were not detected. 13C2- and 12C2-acetate supplemented anoxic
microcosms with endogenous nitrate and acetylene at an in situ near pH of 4 were 
used to assess acetate dependent carbon flow, denitrification and N2O production.
Initial nitrate and acetate were consumed within 6 and 11 days, respectively, and
primarily converted to CO2 and N2, suggesting complete acetate fueled
denitrification at acidic pH. Stable isotope probing coupled to 16S rRNA analysis
via Illumina MiSeq amplicon sequencing identified acetate consuming key players
of the family Burkholderiaceae during complete denitrification correlating with
Rhodanobacter spp. The archaeal community consisted primarily of
ammonia-oxidizing Archaea of Nitrososphaeraceae, and was stable during the
incubation. The collective data indicate that peat circles (i) host acid-tolerant
denitrifiers capable of complete denitrification at pH 4-5.5, (ii) other
parameters like carbon availability rather than pH are possible reasons for high 
N2O emissions in situ, and (iii) Burkholderiaceae are responsive key acetate
assimilators co-occurring with Rhodanobacter sp. during denitrification,
suggesting both organisms being associated with acid-tolerant denitrification in 
peat circles.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hetz and Horn.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.628269 
PMCID: PMC7892595
PMID: 33613495 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

