
1. Bioengineered. 2021 Dec;12(1):720-735. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1889109.

The roles of microbial products in the development of colorectal cancer: a
review.

Fang Y(1), Yan C(1), Zhao Q(2), Xu J(3), Liu Z(1), Gao J(1), Zhu H(2), Dai Z(2), 
Wang D(3), Tang D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medical College, Dalian Medical University, Dalian,
Liaoning, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Clinical Medical College, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, P.R.
China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Institute of General Surgery, Clinical Medical 
College, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.

A large number of microbes exist in the gut and they have the ability to process 
and utilize ingested food. It has been reported that their products are involved 
in colorectal cancer development. The molecular mechanisms which underlie the
relationship between gut microbial products and CRC are still not fully
understood. The role of some microbial products in CRC is particularly
controversial. Elucidating the effects of gut microbiota products on CRC and
their possible mechanisms is vital for CRC prevention and treatment. In this
review, recent studies are examined in order to describe the contribution
metabolites and toxicants which are produced by gut microbes make to CRC,
primarily focusing on the involved molecular mechanisms.Abbreviations: CRC:
colorectal cancer; SCFAs: short chain fatty acids; HDAC: histone deacetylase; TCA
cycle: tricarboxylic acid cycle; CoA: cytosolic acyl coenzyme A; SCAD: short
chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase; HDAC: histone deacetylase; MiR-92a: microRNA-92a;
KLF4: kruppel-like factor; PTEN: phosphatase and tensin homolog; PI3K:
phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PIP2: phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-biphosphate; PIP3:
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate; Akt1: protein kinase B subtype α;
ERK1/2: extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2; EMT:
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition; NEDD9: neural precursor cell expressed
developmentally down-regulated9; CAS: Crk-associated substrate; JNK: c-Jun
N-terminal kinase; PRMT1: protein arginine methyltransferase 1; UDCA:
ursodeoxycholic acid; BA: bile acids; CA: cholic acid; CDCA: chenodeoxycholic
acid; DCA: deoxycholic acid; LCA: lithocholic acid; CSCs: cancer stem cells; MHC:
major histocompatibility; NF-κB: NF-kappaB; GPR: G protein-coupled receptors;
ROS: reactive oxygen species; RNS: reactive nitrogen substances; BER: base
excision repair; DNA: deoxyribonucleic acid; EGFR: epidermal growth factor
receptor; MAPK: mitogen activated protein kinase; ERKs: extracellular signal
regulated kinases; AKT: protein kinase B; PA: phosphatidic acid; TMAO:
trimethylamine n-oxide; TMA: trimethylamine; FMO3: flavin-containing
monooxygenase 3; H2S: Hydrogen sulfide; SRB: sulfate-reducing bacteria; IBDs:
inflammatory bowel diseases; NSAID: non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; BFT:
fragile bacteroides toxin; ETBF: enterotoxigenic fragile bacteroides; E-cadherin:
extracellular domain of intercellular adhesive protein; CEC: colonic epithelial
cells; SMOX: spermine oxidase; SMO: smoothened; Stat3: signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3; Th17: T helper cell 17; IL17: interleukin 17; AA:
amino acid; TCF: transcription factor; CDT: cytolethal distending toxin; PD-L1:
programmed cell death 1 ligand 1.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1889109 
PMID: 33618627 

