
1. Environ Microbiol. 2021 Feb 21. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15439. [Epub ahead of
print]

Identification of the genes encoding the catalytic steps corresponding to LRA4
(l-2-keto-3-deoxyrhamnonate aldolase) and l-lactaldehyde dehydrogenase in
Aspergillus nidulans: evidence for involvement of the loci AN9425/lraD and
AN0544/aldA in the l-rhamnose catabolic pathway.

MacCabe A(1), Sanmartín G(1), Orejas M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de Alimentos (IATA), Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), c/ Catedrático Agustín Escardino Benlloch 7, 
Paterna, Valencia, 46980, Spain.

l-rhamnose is found in nature mainly as a component of structural plant
polysaccharides and can be used as a carbon source by certain microorganisms.
Catabolism of this sugar in bacteria, archaea and fungi occurs by two routes
involving either phosphorylated or non-phosphorylated intermediates. Unlike the
corresponding pathway in yeasts, the metabolic details of the non-phosphorylated 
pathway in filamentous fungi are not fully defined. The first three genes (lraA, 
lraB and lraC) of the non-phosphorylated pathway in Aspergillus nidulans have
recently been studied revealing dependence on lraA function for growth on
l-rhamnose and α-l-rhamnosidase production. In the present work, two genes
encoding the subsequent steps catalysed by l-2-keto-3-deoxyrhamnonate (l-KDR)
aldolase (AN9425) and l-lactaldehyde dehydrogenase (AN0554) are identified.
Loss-of-function mutations cause adverse growth effects on l-rhamnose. Akin to
genes lraA-C and those encoding rhamnosidases (rhaA, rhaE), their expression is
induced on l-rhamnose via the transcriptional activator RhaR. Interestingly, the 
aldolase belongs to the ftablamily of bacterial l-KDR aldolases (PF03328/COG3836)
and not that of yeasts (PF00701/COG0329). In addition, AN0554 corresponds to the 
previously characterized aldA gene (encodes aldehyde dehydrogenase involved in
ethanol utilization) thus revealing a previously unknown role for this gene in
the catabolism of l-rhamnose.

© 2021 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15439 
PMID: 33615657 

