
1. JCI Insight. 2021 Mar 22;6(6). pii: 140273. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.140273.

Constitutive activation of WASp leads to abnormal cytotoxic cells with increased 
granzyme B and degranulation response to target cells.

Kritikou JS(1), Oliveira MM(1), Record J(1), Saeed MB(1), Nigam SM(1), He M(1),
Keszei M(1), Wagner AK(1), Brauner H(1)(2), Sendel A(1), Sedimbi SK(1), Rentouli 
S(1), Lane DP(1), Snapper SB(3), Kärre K(1), Vandenberghe P(4), Orange JS(5),
Westerberg LS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology Tumor and Cell Biology, Biomedicum C7, and.
(2)Department of Medicine, Solna, Division of Rheumatology, Center for Molecular 
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Gastroenterology Division, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's
Hospital, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, New
York, New York, USA.

X-linked neutropenia (XLN) is caused by gain-of-function mutations in the actin
regulator Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein (WASp). XLN patients have reduced
numbers of cytotoxic cells in peripheral blood; however, their capacity to kill
tumor cells remains to be determined. Here, we examined NK and T cells from 2
patients with XLN harboring the activating WASpL270P mutation. XLN patient NK and
T cells had increased granzyme B content and elevated degranulation and IFN-γ
production when compared with healthy control cells. Murine WASpL272P NK and T
cells formed stable synapses with YAC-1 tumor cells and anti-CD3/CD28-coated
beads, respectively. WASpL272P mouse T cells had normal degranulation and
cytokine response whereas WASpL272P NK cells showed an enhanced response. Imaging
experiments revealed that while WASpL272P CD8+ T cells had increased accumulation
of actin upon TCR activation, WASpL272P NK cells had normal actin accumulation at
lytic synapses triggered through NKp46 signaling but had impaired response to
lymphocyte function associated antigen-1 engagement. When compared with WT mice, 
WASpL272P mice showed reduced growth of B16 melanoma and increased capacity to
reject MHC class I-deficient cells. Together, our data suggest that cytotoxic
cells with constitutively active WASp have an increased capacity to respond to
and kill tumor cells.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.140273 
PMID: 33621210 

