
1. Thorax. 2021 Feb 25. pii: thoraxjnl-2020-215986. doi:
10.1136/thoraxjnl-2020-215986. [Epub ahead of print]

Neutrophils in asthma: the good, the bad and the bacteria.

Crisford H(1), Sapey E(1)(2), Rogers GB(3)(4), Taylor S(3)(4), Nagakumar P(1)(5),
Lokwani R(6), Simpson JL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK.
(2)University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(3)SAHMRI Microbiome Research Laboratory, Flinders University College of Medicine
and Public Health, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(4)Microbiome and Host Health, South Australian Health and Medical Research
Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(5)Respiratory Medicine, Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, 
Birmingham, UK.
(6)Faculty of Health and Medicine, Priority Research Centre for Healthy Lungs,
The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia.
(7)Faculty of Health and Medicine, Priority Research Centre for Healthy Lungs,
The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia
jodie.simpson@newcastle.edu.au.

Airway inflammation plays a key role in asthma pathogenesis but is heterogeneous 
in nature. There has been significant scientific discovery with regard to type
2-driven, eosinophil-dominated asthma, with effective therapies ranging from
inhaled corticosteroids to novel biologics. However, studies suggest that
approximately 1 in 5 adults with asthma have an increased proportion of
neutrophils in their airways. These patients tend to be older, have potentially
pathogenic airway bacteria and do not respond well to classical therapies.
Currently, there are no specific therapeutic options for these patients, such as 
neutrophil-targeting biologics.Neutrophils comprise 70% of the total circulatory 
white cells and play a critical defence role during inflammatory and infective
challenges. This makes them a problematic target for therapeutics. Furthermore,
neutrophil functions change with age, with reduced microbial killing, increased
reactive oxygen species release and reduced production of extracellular traps
with advancing age. Therefore, different therapeutic strategies may be required
for different age groups of patients.The pathogenesis of neutrophil-dominated
airway inflammation in adults with asthma may reflect a counterproductive
response to the defective neutrophil microbial killing seen with age, resulting
in bystander damage to host airway cells and subsequent mucus hypersecretion and 
airway remodelling. However, in children with asthma, neutrophils are less
associated with adverse features of disease, and it is possible that in children,
neutrophils are less pathogenic.In this review, we explore the mechanisms of
neutrophil recruitment, changes in cellular function across the life course and
the implications this may have for asthma management now and in the future. We
also describe the prevalence of neutrophilic asthma globally, with a focus on
First Nations people of Australia, New Zealand and North America.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2020-215986 
PMID: 33632765 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: HC reports a Student
Development Fund Scholarship from University of Birmingham during the conduct of 
the study; grants from West Midlands Chest Fund outside the submitted work. ES
reports grants from Medical Research Council, grants from Wellcome Trust, grants 
from NIHR, grants from British Lung Foundation, grants from Alpha 1 Foundation
and grants from HDR-UK outside the submitted work.

