
1. Arch Microbiol. 2021 Feb 26. doi: 10.1007/s00203-021-02199-5. [Epub ahead of
print]

The role of oral microbiome in pemphigus vulgaris.

Zorba M(1), Melidou A(2), Patsatsi A(3), Poulopoulos A(4), Gioula G(2),
Kolokotronis A(4), Minti F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Oral Pathology, School of Dentistry, Faculty
of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
zormpam@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Autoimmune Skin and Bullous Diseases Outpatient Unit of Papageorgiou General
Hospital, 2nd Dermatology Department, School of Medicine, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Department of Oral Medicine and Oral Pathology, School of Dentistry, Faculty
of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.

While the impact of oral microbiome dysbiosis on autoimmune diseases has been
partially investigated, its role on bullous diseases like Pemphigus Vulgaris (PV)
is a totally unexplored field. This study aims to present the composition and
relative abundance of microbial communities in both healthy individuals and
patients with oral PV lesions. Ion Torrent was used to apply deep sequencing of
the bacterial 16S rRNA gene to oral smear samples of 15 healthy subjects and 15
patients. The results showed that the most dominant phyla were Firmicutes (55.88%
controls-c vs 61.27% patients-p, p value = 0.002), Proteobacteria (9.17%c vs
12.33%p, p value = 0.007) and Fusobacteria (3.39%c vs 4.09%p, p value = 0.03).
Alpha diversity showed a significant difference in the number of genera between
patients and controls (p value = 0.04). Beta diversity showed statistical
differences in the microbial community composition between two groups.
Fusobacterium nucleatum, Gemella haemolysans and Parvimonas micra were
statistically abundant in patients. We noticed the characteristic fetor coming
out of oral PV lesions. Most of anaerobic bacteria responsible for oral halitosis
are periopathogenic. Though, only F. nucleatum and P. micra were differentially
abundant in our patients. Especially, F. nucleatum has been reported many times
as responsible for bad breath. Furthermore, Streptococcus salivarius and Rothia
mucilaginosa, species mostly associated with clean breath, were found in relative
abundance in the healthy group. Consequently, the distinct malodor observed in PV
patients might be attributed either to the abundance of F. nucleatum and P. micra
and/or to the lower levels of S. salivarius and R. mucilanginosa in oral lesions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-021-02199-5 
PMID: 33634320 

