
1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Feb 24:100465. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100465. [Epub ahead of
print]

TNF receptor-associated factor 3 restrains B cell receptor signaling in normal
and malignant B cells.

Whillock AL(1), Ybarra TK(2), Bishop GA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Microbiology & Immunology; Immunology Graduate Program; Medical
Scientist Training Program; Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Iowa.
(2)Dept. of Microbiology & Immunology; Immunology Graduate Program.
(3)Dept. of Microbiology & Immunology; Dept. of Internal Medicine; Immunology
Graduate Program; Medical Scientist Training Program; Holden Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Iowa; VA Medical Center, Iowa City, IA. Electronic address:
gail-bishop@uiowa.edu.

TRAF3 has diverse signaling functions which vary by cell type. Uniquely in B
lymphocytes, TRAF3 inhibits homeostatic survival. Highlighting the role of TRAF3 
as a tumor suppressor, loss of function TRAF3 mutations are associated with human
B cell malignancies, while B cell-specific deletion of TRAF3 in mice leads to
autoimmunity and lymphoma development. The role of TRAF3 in inhibiting
non-canonical NF-κB activation, CD40 and BAFF-R signaling to B cells is
well-documented. In contrast, TRAF3 enhances many T cell effector functions,
through associating with and enhancing signaling by the T cell receptor
(TCR)-CD28 complex. The present study was designed to determine the role of TRAF3
in signaling via the B cell antigen receptor (BCR). The BCR is crucial for
antigen recognition, survival, proliferation, and antibody production, and
defects in BCR signaling can promote abnormal survival of malignant B cells.
Here, we show that TRAF3 associated with both CD79B and the BCR-activated kinases
Syk and Btk following BCR stimulation. BCR-induced phosphorylation of Syk and
additional downstream kinases was increased in TRAF3-/- B cells, with regulation 
observed in both follicular and marginal zone B cell subsets. BCR stimulation of 
TRAF3-/- B cells resulted in increased surface expression of MHC-II, CD80, and
CD86 molecules. Interestingly, increased survival of TRAF3-/- primary B cells was
resistant to inhibition of Btk, while TRAF3-deficient malignant B cell lines
showed enhanced sensitivity. TRAF3 serves to restrain normal and malignant BCR
signaling, with important implications for its role in normal B cell biology and 
abnormal survival of malignant B cells.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100465 
PMID: 33639170 

