
1. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2021 Mar 3:1-12. doi: 10.1080/10408398.2020.1871320.
[Epub ahead of print]

Saffron anti-metastatic properties, ancient spice novel application.

Arzi L(1), Hoshyar R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Shahr-e-Qods Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, USA.

Crocus sativus L. (saffron), was applied as a spice, food colorant and medicine
since four millennia ago and has been used as a remedy for various maladies. In
the last three decades, the anti-primary tumor properties of saffron and its main
carotenoids, crocin and crocetin, have been well explored. Despite the fact that 
metastasis is the leading cause of death in cancer patients, the anti-metastatic 
potential of saffron and its carotenoids has been surveyed only this decade. This
review aims to provide an unprecedented overview of the anti-metastatic effects
of saffron, crocin and crocetin, and the mechanisms underlying these effects.
Investigations on various cancers demonstrated the anti-migratory, anti-invasion,
anti-angiogenic potentials of saffron and its carotenoids, as well as their
effects suppressing cell-ECM adhesion and enhancing cell-cell attachment. Saffron
and its carotenoids exert their impact through different mechanisms such as
reduction of CD34 and suppression of Wnt/Î²-catenin, Ras/ERK, P38, DCLK1, EMT,
matrix metalloproteinases and urokinases. Crocin displayed more effective
anti-metastatic potency, in comparison with saffron extract and crocetin. The
bioaccessibility/bioavailability, nontoxicity on normal cells, confirmed
anti-tumor efficiency and the recent evidence on the anti-metastatic potential of
saffron and its carotenoids, recommends them as a propitious multipotent dietary 
agent and herbal medicine.

DOI: 10.1080/10408398.2020.1871320 
PMID: 33653190 

