
1. Mol Biol Rep. 2021 Mar 1. doi: 10.1007/s11033-021-06239-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Whole genome strategies and bioremediation insight into dehalogenase-producing
bacteria.

Oyewusi HA(1)(2), Wahab RA(3), Huyop F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Faculty of Science, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 
81310, Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia. adekilekun_oh@fedpolyado.edu.ng.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Science and Computer Studies, Federal
Polytechnic Ado Ekiti, PMB 5351, Ado Ekiti, Ekiti State, Nigeria.
adekilekun_oh@fedpolyado.edu.ng.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia,
81310, Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Biosciences, Faculty of Science, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 
81310, Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia. fahrul@utm.my.

An integral approach to decoding both culturable and uncultured microorganisms'
metabolic activity involves the whole genome sequencing (WGS) of
individual/complex microbial communities. WGS of culturable microbes, amplicon
sequencing, metagenomics, and single-cell genome analysis are selective
techniques integrating genetic information and biochemical mechanisms. These
approaches transform microbial biotechnology into a quick and high-throughput
culture-independent evaluation and exploit pollutant-degrading microbes. They are
windows into enzyme regulatory bioremediation pathways (i.e., dehalogenase) and
the complete bioremediation process of organohalide pollutants. While the genome 
sequencing technique is gaining the scientific community's interest, it is still 
in its infancy in the field of pollutant bioremediation. The techniques are
becoming increasingly helpful in unraveling and predicting the enzyme structure
and explore metabolic and biodegradation capabilities.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-021-06239-7 
PMID: 33650078 

