
1. Molecules. 2021 Feb 26;26(5). pii: 1261. doi: 10.3390/molecules26051261.

Cytotoxicity and Apoptosis Effects of Curcumin Analogue
(2E,6E)-2,6-Bis(2,3-Dimethoxybenzylidine) Cyclohexanone (DMCH) on Human Colon
Cancer Cells HT29 and SW620 In Vitro.

Rahim NFC(1), Hussin Y(1), Aziz MNM(1), Mohamad NE(1)(2), Yeap SK(3), Masarudin
MJ(1)(4), Abdullah R(5), Akhtar MN(6), Alitheen NB(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biotechnology and
Biomolecular Sciences, University Putra Malaysia, UPM, Serdang 43400, Selangor,
Malaysia.
(2)Biotechnology Research Institute, University Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu
88400, Sabah, Malaysia.
(3)China-ASEAN College of Marine Sciences, Xiamen University Malaysia, Sepang
43900, Selangor, Malaysia.
(4)UPM-MAKNA Cancer Research Laboratory, Institute of Bioscience, University
Putra Malaysia, Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Veterinary Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University Putra Malaysia, UPM, Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(6)Faculty of Industrial Sciences & Technology, University Malaysia Pahang,
Lebuhraya Tun Razak, Kuantan 26300, Pahang, Malaysia.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common type of cancer worldwide and a
leading cause of cancer death. According to the Malaysian National Cancer
Registry Report 2012-2016, colorectal cancer was the second most common cancer in
Malaysia after breast cancer. Recent treatments for colon cancer cases have
caused side effects and recurrence in patients. One of the alternative ways to
fight cancer is by using natural products. Curcumin is a compound of the rhizomes
of Curcuma longa that possesses a broad range of pharmacological activities.
Curcumin has been studied for decades but due to its low bioavailability, its
usage as a therapeutic agent has been compromised. This has led to the
development of a chemically synthesized curcuminoid analogue,
(2E,6E)-2,6-bis(2,3-dimethoxybenzylidine) cyclohexanone (DMCH), to overcome the
drawbacks. This study aims to examine the potential of DMCH for cytotoxicity,
apoptosis induction, and activation of apoptosis-related proteins on the colon
cancer cell lines HT29 and SW620. The cytotoxic activity of DMCH was evaluated
using the [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] (MTT)
cell viability assay on both of the cell lines, HT29 and SW620. To determine the 
mode of cell death, an acridine orange/propidium iodide (AO/PI) assay was
conducted, followed by Annexin V/FITC, cell cycle analysis, and JC-1 assay using 
a flow cytometer. A proteome profiler angiogenesis assay was conducted to
determine the protein expression. The inhibitory concentration (IC50) of DMCH in 
SW620 and HT29 was 7.50 ± 1.19 and 9.80 ± 0.55 µg/mL, respectively. The treated
cells displayed morphological features characteristic of apoptosis. The flow
cytometry analysis confirmed that DMCH induced apoptosis as shown by an increase 
in the sub-G0/G1 population and an increase in the early apoptosis and late
apoptosis populations compared with untreated cells. A higher number of apoptotic
cells were observed on treated SW620 cells as compared to HT29 cells. Human
apoptosis proteome profiler analysis revealed upregulation of Bax and Bad
proteins and downregulation of Livin proteins in both the HT29 and SW620 cell
lines. Collectively, DMCH induced cell death via apoptosis, and the effect was
more pronounced on SW620 metastatic colon cancer cells, suggesting its potential 
effects as an antimetastatic agent targeting colon cancer cells.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26051261 
PMCID: PMC7956430
PMID: 33652694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

