
1. Toxins (Basel). 2021 Feb 16;13(2). pii: 151. doi: 10.3390/toxins13020151.

The Buzz about ADP-Ribosylation Toxins from Paenibacillus larvae, the Causative
Agent of American Foulbrood in Honey Bees.

Ebeling J(1), Fünfhaus A(1), Genersch E(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Bee Diseases, Institute for Bee
Research, 16540 Hohen Neuendorf, Germany.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Microbiology and Epizootics,
Freie Universität Berlin, 14163 Berlin, Germany.

The Gram-positive, spore-forming bacterium Paenibacillus larvae is the
etiological agent of American Foulbrood, a highly contagious and often fatal
honey bee brood disease. The species P. larvae comprises five so-called
ERIC-genotypes which differ in virulence and pathogenesis strategies. In the past
two decades, the identification and characterization of several P. larvae
virulence factors have led to considerable progress in understanding the
molecular basis of pathogen-host-interactions during P. larvae infections. Among 
these virulence factors are three ADP-ribosylating AB-toxins, Plx1, Plx2, and
C3larvin. Plx1 is a phage-born toxin highly homologous to the pierisin-like
AB-toxins expressed by the whites-and-yellows family Pieridae (Lepidoptera,
Insecta) and to scabin expressed by the plant pathogen Streptomyces scabiei.
These toxins ADP-ribosylate DNA and thus induce apoptosis. While the presumed
cellular target of Plx1 still awaits final experimental proof, the classification
of the A subunits of the binary AB-toxins Plx2 and C3larvin as typical C3-like
toxins, which ADP-ribosylate Rho-proteins, has been confirmed experimentally.
Normally, C3-exoenzymes do not occur together with a B subunit partner, but as
single domain toxins. Interestingly, the B subunits of the two P. larvae C3-like 
toxins are homologous to the B-subunits of C2-like toxins with striking
structural similarity to the PA-63 protomer of Bacillus anthracis.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins13020151 
PMCID: PMC7919650
PMID: 33669183 

