
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Feb 28;9(3). pii: 202. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9030202.

Ageing of Immune System and Response to a Live-Attenuated Herpes Zoster Vaccine
in Lung Transplant Candidates.

Wang L(1), Verschuuren EAM(2), Paap D(1)(3), Rondaan C(4), Raveling-Eelsing E(1),
Liu S(1), Westra J(1), Bos NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical
Immunology, University of Groningen, 9713 EZ Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Pulmonary Diseases and
Tuberculosis, University of Groningen, 9713 EZ Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Rehabilitation Medicine,
University of Groningen, 9713 EZ Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Medical Microbiology and
Infection Prevention, University of Groningen, 9713 EZ Groningen, The
Netherlands.

The mean age of lung transplant recipients has significantly increased in recent 
decades. Elderly recipients have a higher risk of developing herpes zoster (HZ), 
and they have in general a worse response to vaccination than younger persons do.
We investigated the relationship between the humoral and cellular immune response
to a live-attenuated HZ vaccine (Zostavax®, Merck Sharp and Dohme) and the
frequencies of T and B cell subsets, especially aged cell subsets (CD28-T cells
and age associated B cells, ABCs). In total, 37 patients awaiting lung
transplantation received one dose of Zostavax®, and peripheral blood was
collected before and within 6 months after vaccination. We observed a robust
immune response after vaccination. The frequencies of CD28-T cells before
vaccination had no impact on the subsequent immune response to HZ vaccination.
However, a higher frequency of ABCs before vaccination correlated with a lower
immune response especially regarding the cellular immune response.
Cytomegalovirus seropositivity was associated with increased frequencies of
CD28-T cells but not with frequencies of ABCs in the patients. In conclusion,
increased levels of ABCs might disturb the cellular immune response to HZ
vaccination, which could lower the efficacy of such vaccination in elderly
transplant recipients.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9030202 
PMCID: PMC7997229
PMID: 33671003 

