
1. Pathogens. 2021 Feb 27;10(3). pii: 270. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10030270.

Development of an Indirect ELISA to Detect Equine Antibodies to Theileria haneyi.

Bastos RG(1), Sears KP(1), Dinkel KD(1), Kappmeyer L(2), Ueti MW(1)(2), Knowles
DP(1), Fry LM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology & Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA.
(2)Animal Disease Research Unit, USDA-ARS, Pullman, WA 99164, USA.

The apicomplexan parasite Theileria haneyi is one of two known causative agents
of equine theileriosis. It causes milder clinical disease than its more virulent 
counterpart, Theileria equi, in experimentally infected horses, and can
superinfect T. equi-positive horses. The current equi merozoite antigen 1
(EMA1)-based competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)used in the
U.S. to detect equine theileriosis detects T. equi but not T. haneyi, and the
complexity of molecular assays precludes widespread use for epidemiologic
studies. In order to facilitate urgently needed studies on the prevalence of T.
haneyi, the goal of this study was to develop a sensitive and specific serologic 
assay for the diagnosis of T. haneyi based on the equi merozoite antigen 11
(ThEMA11). To achieve this objective, ThEMA11 was recombinantly expressed in
eukaryotic cells and its antigenicity assessed using sera from T.
haneyi-experimentally infected horses. Confirmation of sera reactivity enabled
design and optimization of an indirect ELISA. Specificity of the ELISA for T.
haneyi was assessed using a cohort of sera from horses experimentally infected
and confirmed PCR-positive for either T. equi or T. haneyi. Data from field
samples further demonstrate that the ThEMA11 ELISA is capable of identifying T.
haneyi antibodies in horses from multiple continents around the world.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10030270 
PMCID: PMC7997436
PMID: 33673478 

