
1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2021 Mar 2;16:545-552. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S283832. eCollection 2021.

Polyvalent Immunoglobulin as a Potential Treatment Option for Patients with
Recurrent COPD Exacerbations.

Unninayar D(1), Abdallah SJ(2), Cameron DW(2)(3)(4), Cowan J(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Clinical Epidemiology Program, The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Centre of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by chronic airway
inflammation and episodes of worsening respiratory symptoms and pulmonary
function, termed acute exacerbations of COPD (AECOPD). AECOPD episodes are
associated with heightened airway inflammation and are often triggered by
infection. A subset of COPD patients develops frequent exacerbations despite
maximal existing standard medical therapy. It is therefore clear that a targeted 
and more effective prevention strategy is needed. Immunoglobulins are
glycoprotein molecules that are secreted by B lymphocytes and plasma cells and
play a critical role in the adaptive immune response against many pathogens.
Altered serum immunoglobulin levels have been observed in patients with
immunodeficiencies and inflammatory diseases. Serum immunoglobulin has also been 
identified as potential biomarkers of AECOPD frequency. Since plasma-derived
polyvalent immunoglobulin treatment is effective in preventing recurrent
infections in immunodeficient patients and in suppressing inflammation in many
inflammatory diseases, it may be conceivable that immunoglobulin treatment may be
effective in preventing recurrent AECOPD. In this article, we provide a review of
the current knowledge on immunoglobulin treatment in patients with COPD and
discuss plausible mechanisms as to how immunoglobulin treatment may work to
reduce AECOPD frequency.

Â© 2021 Unninayar et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S283832 
PMCID: PMC7936713
PMID: 33688179 

Conflict of interest statement: DWC and JC received grant funding through our
institution (OHRI) from CSL Behring and Grifols for an investigator-sponsored
clinical trial of IVIG in recurrent AECOPD. No influence or conflict exists, but 
might be perceived. JC reports grants from CSL Behring, grants from Grifols,
grants from Takeda, grants and personal fees from OctaPharma, personal fees from 
GSK, personal fees from Sanofi, personal fees from Alexion Pharma, personal fees 
from EMD Serono outside the submitted work. DU and SJA do not have competing
interests to declare.

