
1. Oncol Lett. 2021 Apr;21(4):325. doi: 10.3892/ol.2021.12587. Epub 2021 Feb 24.

Expression of immune check point gene TIM-3 in patients newly diagnosed with
acute myeloid leukemia: Significance and impact on outcome.

Kamal AM(1), Nabih NA(2), Elleboudy NS(3), Radwan SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams University, Cairo
11566, Egypt.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Clinical Hematology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, Cairo 11591,
Egypt.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams
University, Cairo 11566, Egypt.

Despite recent advancements in the therapeutic landscape of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), the prognosis of patients remains poor. Immune check point
inhibitors have been investigated in hematological malignancies, including AML;
however, the role of T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 3 (TIM-3) in AML has 
not yet been fully elucidated. Thus, the present study aimed to investigate TIM-3
gene expression in patients with AML and determine its associations with
prognostic variables and clinical outcome. A total of 60 patients newly diagnosed
with AML and 15 healthy matching individuals were recruited in the present study,
and reverse transcription-quantitative PCR analysis was performed to detect TIM-3
expression. The results demonstrated that TIM-3 expression was significantly
upregulated in patients with AML compared with that in healthy individuals
(P<0.001). In addition, patients with extramedullary disease (EMD) exhibited
significantly lower median TIM-3 expression levels compared with those without
EMD (P=0.001). Furthermore, patients with high TIM-3 expression had significantly
lower complete remission rates following induction chemotherapy compared with
those with low TIM-3 expression (P=0.004). High TIM-3 expression was
significantly associated with lower overall survival rates during the 1-year
follow-up (P=0.001). Taken together, the results of the present study suggest
that TIM-3 may act as a biomarker of a poor prognosis in patients with AML, and
be used as a therapeutic target.

Copyright: Â© Kamal et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2021.12587 
PMCID: PMC7933755
PMID: 33692857 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

