
1. Photochem Photobiol. 2021 Mar 11. doi: 10.1111/php.13413. [Epub ahead of print]

Spectrofluorometric Insights into the Application of PAM Fluorometry in
Photosynthetic Research.

Sma-Air S(1), Ritchie RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)ANED (Andaman Environment and Natural Disaster Research Centre), Faculty of
Technology and Environment, Prince of Songkla University-Phuket, Phuket,
Thailand, 83120.

Although Pulse Amplitude Modulation (PAM) fluorometry has revolutionized
photosynthetic studies, Photosynthetic Electron Transport Rate (ETR) cannot be
measured using PAM technology in some organisms. We compare in vivo absorbance
information on a selection of photosynthetic organisms using an integrating
sphere spectrophotometry on a variety of oxygenic and non-oxygenic
photo-organisms and provide fluorescence data to help in understanding why PAM
technology is unsuccessful on some organisms, particularly cyanobacteria. The
study includes anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria: Afifella marina,
Rhodopseudomonas palustris and Thermochromatium which are all RC-2 type
photosynthetic bacteria (Bacteriochlorophyll a or BChl a) which are known to have
measureable delayed fluorescence, Yield and hence measureable ETR. The common
unicellular green alga, Chlorella sp (Chl a + b) uses the same primary
photosynthetic pigments as vascular plants. Comparisons are made to some other
representative oxygenic unicellular organisms: Trebouxia (Chlorophyta, Chl a +
b), Chaetoceros (a diatom, Chl a +c1 c2 ) and the unusual cyanobacterium
Acaryochloris marina which has Chl d + a but uses Chl d as its primary
photosynthetic pigment. Synechococcus R-2 (Cyanobacteria) has only Chl a. Its
fluorescence is outside the range normally used for measuring photosynthesis
using PAM technology: delayed fluorescence is not readily detectable.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/php.13413 
PMID: 33704805 

