
1. BMC Biol. 2021 Mar 11;19(1):43. doi: 10.1186/s12915-021-00967-9.

Divergent CPEB prion-like domains reveal different assembly mechanisms for a
generic amyloid-like fold.

Hervás R(#)(1)(2), Del Carmen Fernández-Ramírez M(#)(3), Galera-Prat A(3), Suzuki
M(4)(5), Nagai Y(4)(6), Bruix M(7), Menéndez M(7)(8), Laurents DV(7),
Carrión-Vázquez M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, IC-CSIC, Avda. Doctor Arce 37, E-28002, Madrid, Spain.
ruhm@hku.hk.
(2)Present address: School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China.
ruhm@hku.hk.
(3)Instituto Cajal, IC-CSIC, Avda. Doctor Arce 37, E-28002, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Degenerative Neurological Diseases, National Institute of
Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Present address: Diabetic Neuropathy Project, Department of Sensory and Motor 
Systems, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Present address: Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Kindai
University, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Instituto de Química-Física Rocasolano, IQFR-CSIC, Serrano 119, E-28006,
Madrid, Spain.
(8)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), C/ Monforte de Lemos 3-5, 28029, Madrid, Spain.
(9)Instituto Cajal, IC-CSIC, Avda. Doctor Arce 37, E-28002, Madrid, Spain.
mcarrion@cajal.csic.es.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Amyloids are ordered, insoluble protein aggregates, characterized by 
a cross-β sheet quaternary structure in which molecules in a β-strand
conformation are stacked along the filament axis via intermolecular interactions.
While amyloids are typically associated with pathological conditions, functional 
amyloids have also been identified and are present in a wide variety of organisms
ranging from bacteria to humans. The cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding 
(CPEB) prion-like protein is an mRNA-binding translation regulator, whose
neuronal isoforms undergo activity-dependent aggregation, a process that has
emerged as a plausible biochemical substrate for memory maintenance. CPEB
aggregation is driven by prion-like domains (PLD) that are divergent in sequence 
across species, and it remains unknown whether such divergent PLDs follow a
similar aggregating assembly pathway. Here, we describe the amyloid-like features
of the neuronal Aplysia CPEB (ApCPEB) PLD and compare them to those of the
Drosophila ortholog, Orb2 PLD.
RESULTS: Using in vitro single-molecule and bulk biophysical methods, we find
transient oligomers and mature amyloid-like filaments that suggest similarities
in the late stages of the assembly pathway for both ApCPEB and Orb2 PLDs.
However, while prior to aggregation the Orb2 PLD monomer remains mainly as a
random coil in solution, ApCPEB PLD adopts a diversity of conformations
comprising α-helical structures that evolve to coiled-coil species, indicating
structural differences at the beginning of their amyloid assembly pathways.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that divergent PLDs of CPEB proteins from
different species retain the ability to form a generic amyloid-like fold through 
different assembly mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1186/s12915-021-00967-9 
PMCID: PMC7953810
PMID: 33706787 

