
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2021 Jul;120:104067. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104067. Epub 2021 
Mar 8.

Identification of ribosomal protein L30 as an uncharacterized antimicrobial
protein.

Chen Y(1), Yao L(1), Wang Y(1), Ji X(1), Gao Z(1), Zhang S(2), Ji G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Biology, Laboratory for Evolution & Development,
Institute of Evolution & Marine Biodiversity, Ocean University of China, Qingdao,
266003, China.
(2)Department of Marine Biology, Laboratory for Evolution & Development,
Institute of Evolution & Marine Biodiversity, Ocean University of China, Qingdao,
266003, China; Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Pilot National
Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology (Qingdao), Qingdao, 266003, China.
(3)Department of Marine Biology, Laboratory for Evolution & Development,
Institute of Evolution & Marine Biodiversity, Ocean University of China, Qingdao,
266003, China. Electronic address: jamesdong@ouc.edu.cn.

Several ribosomal proteins have been shown to adopt for an antimicrobial function
as antimicrobial proteins (AMPs). However, information as such is rather limited 
and their mode of action remains ill-defined. Here we demonstrated that amphioxus
RPL30, BjRPL30, was a previously uncharacterized AMP, which was not only capable 
of binding Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria via interaction with LPS, LTA
and PGN but also capable of killing the bacteria. We also showed that the
residues positioned at 2-46 formed the core region for the antimicrobial activity
of BjRPL30. Notably, both the hydrophobic ratio and net charge as well as 3D
structures of the residues corresponding to BjRPL302-27 and BjRPL3023-46 from
both eukaryotic and prokaryotic RPL30 proteins were closely similar to those of
BjRPL302-27 and BjRPL3023-46, suggesting the antibacterial activity of RPL30 was 
highly conserved. This was further corroborated by the fact that the synthesized 
counterparts human RPL5-30 and RPL26-49 also had antibacterial activity. We show 
that the recombinant protein BjRPL30 executes antimicrobial function in vitro by 
a kind of membranolytic action including interaction with bacterial membrane
through LPS, LTA and PGN as well as induction of membrane depolarization.
Finally, we found that neither BjRPL30 nor its truncated form BjRPL302-27 and
BjRPL3023-46 had hemolytic activity towards human red blood cells, making them
promising lead molecules for the design of novel AMPs against bacteria.
Altogether, these indicated that RPL30 is a member of AMP which has ancient
origin and is highly conserve throughout evolution.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104067 
PMID: 33705790 

