
1. J Mol Biol. 2021 Mar 11;433(10):166930. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166930. [Epub
ahead of print]

Spatial organization of Dps and DNA-Dps complexes.

Dubrovin EV(1), Dadinova LA(2), Petoukhov MV(2), Soshinskaya EY(2), Mozhaev
AA(3), Klinov DV(4), Schäffer TE(5), Shtykova EV(2), Batishchev OV(6).

Author information: 
(1)A.N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian
Academy of Sciences, 31/4 Leninskiy prospekt, Moscow 119071, Russia; Lomonosov
Moscow State University, Faculty of Physics, Leninskie Gory 1 bld 2, 119991
Moscow, Russia. Electronic address: dubrovin@polly.phys.msu.ru.
(2)Shubnikov Institute of Crystallography, Federal Scientific Research Centre
"Crystallography and Photonics," Russian Academy of Sciences, 119333 Moscow,
Russia.
(3)Shubnikov Institute of Crystallography, Federal Scientific Research Centre
"Crystallography and Photonics," Russian Academy of Sciences, 119333 Moscow,
Russia; Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy 
of Sciences, 117997 Moscow, Russia.
(4)Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal 
Medical Biological Agency, Malaya Pirogovskaya 1a, 119435 Moscow, Russia.
(5)University of Tübingen, Institute of Applied Physics, Auf der Morgenstelle 10,
72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(6)A.N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian
Academy of Sciences, 31/4 Leninskiy prospekt, Moscow 119071, Russia.

DNA co-crystallization with Dps family proteins is a fundamental mechanism, which
preserves DNA in bacteria from harsh conditions. Though many aspects of this
phenomenon are well characterized, the spatial organization of DNA in DNA-Dps
co-crystals is not completely understood, and existing models need further
clarification. To advance in this problem we have utilized atomic force
microscopy (AFM) as the main structural tool, and small-angle X-scattering (SAXS)
to characterize Dps as a key component of the DNA-protein complex. SAXS analysis 
in the presence of EDTA indicates a significantly larger radius of gyration for
Dps than would be expected for the core of the dodecamer, consistent with the
N-terminal regions extending out into solution and being accessible for
interaction with DNA. In AFM experiments, both Dps protein molecules and DNA-Dps 
complexes adsorbed on mica or highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) surfaces 
form densely packed hexagonal structures with a characteristic size of about
9 nm. To shed light on the peculiarities of DNA interaction with Dps molecules,
we have characterized individual DNA-Dps complexes. Contour length evaluation has
confirmed the non-specific character of Dps binding with DNA and revealed that
DNA does not wrap Dps molecules in DNA-Dps complexes. Angle analysis has
demonstrated that in DNA-Dps complexes a Dps molecule contacts with a DNA segment
of ~6 nm in length. Consideration of DNA condensation upon complex formation with
small Dps quasi-crystals indicates that DNA may be arranged along the rows of
ordered protein molecules on a Dps sheet.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.166930 
PMID: 33713674 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

