
1. Curr Genet. 2021 Mar 16. doi: 10.1007/s00294-021-01165-4. [Epub ahead of print]

Two homologs of the Cat8 transcription factor are involved in the regulation of
ethanol utilization in Komagataella phaffii.

Barbay D(1)(2), Mačáková M(2), Sützl L(3), De S(1)(2), Mattanovich D(1)(2),
Gasser B(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Microbiology and Microbial
Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU), Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Department of Food Technology, University of Natural Resources and Life
Sciences (BOKU), Vienna, Austria.
(4)Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Vienna, Austria.
brigitte.gasser@boku.ac.at.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Microbiology and Microbial
Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU), Vienna, 
Austria. brigitte.gasser@boku.ac.at.

The transcription factors Cat8 and Sip4 were described in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and Kluyveromyces lactis to have very similar DNA binding domains and 
to be necessary for derepression of a variety of genes under non-fermentative
growth conditions via binding to the carbon source responsive elements (CSREs).
The methylotrophic yeast Komagataella phaffii (syn Pichia pastoris) has two
transcription factors (TFs), which are putative homologs of Cat8 based on
sequence similarity, termed Cat8-1 and Cat8-2. It is yet unclear in which
cellular processes they are involved and if one of them is actually the homolog
of Sip4. To study the roles of the Cat8 homologs in K. phaffii, overexpression or
deletion strains were generated for the two TFs. The ability of these mutant
strains to grow on different carbon sources was tested, and transcript levels of 
selected genes from the carbon metabolism were quantified. Our experiments showed
that the TFs are required for the growth of K. phaffii on C2 carbon sources, but 
not on glucose, glycerol or methanol. K. phaffii deleted for Cat8-1 showed
impaired growth on acetate, while both Cat8-1 and Cat8-2 are involved in the
growth of K. phaffii on ethanol. Correspondingly, both TFs are participating in
the activation of ADH2, ALD4 and ACS1, three genes encoding enzymes important for
the assimilation of ethanol. Different from S. cerevisiae and K. lactis, Cat8-1
is not regulating the transcription of the putative Sip4-family member Cat8-2 in 
K. phaffii. Furthermore, Cat8-1 is necessary for the activation of genes from the
glyoxylate cycle, whereas Cat8-2 is necessary for the activation of genes from
the carnitine shuttle. Neither Cat8-1 nor Cat8-2 are required for the activation 
of gluconeogenesis genes. Finally, the CAT8-2 gene is repressed by the Mig1-2
transcription factor on glucose and autorepressed by the Cat8-2 protein on all
tested carbon sources. Our study identified the involvement of K. phaffii Cat8-1 
and Cat8-2 in C2-metabolism, and highlighted similarities and differences to
their homologs in other yeast species.

DOI: 10.1007/s00294-021-01165-4 
PMID: 33725138 

