
1. Autophagy. 2021 Mar 17:1-10. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1894059. [Epub ahead of
print]

TEX264 at the intersection of autophagy and DNA repair.

Fielden J(1), Popović M(2), Ramadan K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology,
Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Laboratory for Molecular Ecotoxicology, Division for Marine and Environmental 
Research, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.

TEX264 (testes expressed gene 264) is a single-pass transmembrane protein,
consisting of an N-terminal hydrophobic region, a gyrase inhibitory (GyrI)-like
domain, and a loosely structured C terminus. TEX264 was first identified as an
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident Atg8-family-binding protein that mediates the
degradation of portions of the ER during starvation (i.e., reticulophagy). More
recently, TEX264 was identified as a cofactor of VCP/p97 ATPase that promotes the
repair of covalently trapped TOP1 (DNA topoisomerase 1)-DNA crosslinks. This
review summarizes the current knowledge of TEX264 as a protein with roles in both
autophagy and DNA repair and provides an evolutionary and structural analysis of 
GyrI proteins. Based on our phylogenetic analysis, we provide evidence that
TEX264 is a member of a large superfamily of GyrI-like proteins that evolved in
bacteria and are present in metazoans, including invertebrates and
chordates.Abbreviations: Atg8: autophagy related 8; Atg39: autophagy related 39; 
Cdc48: cell division cycle 48; CGAS: cyclic GMP-AMP synthase; DPC: DNA-protein
crosslinks; DSB: DNA double-strand break; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; GyrI: gyrase
inhibitory domain; LRR: leucine-rich repeat; MAFFT: multiple alignment using fast
Fourier transform; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3;
MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; STUBL: SUMO targeted ubiquitin
ligase; SUMO: small ubiquitin-like modifier; TEX264: testis expressed gene 264;
TOP1cc: topoisomerase 1-cleavage complex; UBZ: ubiquitin binding Zn finger
domain; VCP: valosin containing protein.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1894059 
PMID: 33726628 

