
1. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2021 Apr 8;42(4):1870-1878. doi: 10.13227/j.hjkx.202007227.

[Biodegradation of Algae-derived Organic Matter (I-DOM) from Lake Taihu].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang QY(1)(2), Sun W(1)(3), Du YX(1), Gong XL(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Lake Science and Environment, Nanjing Institute of
Geography and Limnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing 210008, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)Huangjing Town People's Government, Taicang 215427, China.
(4)Nanjing Wondux Environmental Protection Technology Co., Ltd., Nanjing 211100, 
China.

A large amount of intracellular dissolved organic matter (I-DOM) is released
during the senescent phase of phytoplankton cultures. This research investigated 
the bio-incubation of I-DOM of cyanobacteria in Lake Taihu under various
temperatures (20, 25, and 30℃) and I-DOM initial concentrations (5, 10, and 20
mg·L-1) with the aid of ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis) and
three-dimensional fluorescence matrix-parallel factor (EEM-PARAFAC). I-DOM was
effectively degraded during the incubation. After 14 days, the DOC removal ratio 
was 50% ~74%. A tryptophan-like component (C1), a ubiquitous humic-like component
(C2), and two microbially-derived humic-like components (C3 and C4) contributed
80.0%, 16.0%, 3.7%, and 0.3% to the initial I-DOM, respectively. During the
bio-degradation, these components are not only consumed but also produced. C1
decreased during the incubation, while C3 and C4 increased at the beginning of
biodegradation and then decreased. The change trend of C2 was complicated, i.e., 
it decreased firstly and then increased, but decreased again after 7 days. The
changes in the optical indices of Sr, E2:E3 and HIX revealed that the molecular
weight of DOM increased, and the aromaticity was enhanced during degradation. The
reaction temperature and the initial concentration of I-DOM did not change the
trend of the PARAFAC components. The temperature of 25℃ was the most suitable for
I-DOM bio-degradation. Additionally, the degradation of I-DOM was enhanced with
the increase in the initial concentration of I-DOM. Combined with our study on
the photodegradation of I-DOM, the possible fate of I-DOM in Lake Taihu was
proposed. The tryptophan-like compound could be effectively degraded, while the
humic-like components could not be degraded completely. These humic-like
components would potentially settle through adsorption or coprecipitation with
metal substances. These results are helpful to understand the fate of I-DOM
released by a cyanobacteria bloom in Lake Taihu.

DOI: 10.13227/j.hjkx.202007227 
PMID: 33742822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

