
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Mar 2;12:635531. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.635531. eCollection 
2021.

Double-Edged Sword: Interleukin-2 Promotes T Regulatory Cell Differentiation but 
Also Expands Interleukin-13- and Interferon-γ-Producing CD8+ T Cells via
STAT6-GATA-3 Axis in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.

Kato H(1), Perl A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Departments of Medicine, Microbiology and
Immunology, and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, State
University of New York, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, United States.

Interleukin-2 (IL-2) expands the depleted T regulatory (Treg) cell population,
and it has emerged as a potential therapy in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). 
However, IL-2 administration may involve the risk of expanding unwanted
pro-inflammatory cells. We herein studied the effects of IL-2 on pro-inflammatory
cytokine production by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in parallel with Treg development
following CD3/CD28 co-stimulation. While Treg cells are depleted in SLE patients,
their CD4+ T cells were poised to receive and activate IL-2 signaling as
evidenced by upregulation of CD25 and enhanced IL-2-incued STAT5 phosphorylation 
during Treg differentiation. In patients with SLE, however, IL-2 also expanded
CD8+ T cells capable of producing interleukin-5, interkeukin-13 (IL-13), and
interferon-γ (IFN-γ) that occurred with enhanced expression of GATA-3 and
phosphorylation of STAT6 but not STAT5. Our data pinpoint a safety signal for
systemic administration of IL-2 and challenges a long-held conceptual platform of
type 1 and 2 cytokine antagonism by newly documenting the IL-2-dependent
development of IL-13 and IFN-γ double-positive (IL-13+IFNγ+) CD8+ T cells in SLE.

Copyright © 2021 Kato and Perl.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.635531 
PMCID: PMC7982885
PMID: 33763079 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

