
1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2021 Mar 27;55(2):141-159. doi: 10.33594/000000351.

SUMO-Modification of Human Nrf2 at K110 and K533 Regulates Its Nucleocytoplasmic 
Localization, Stability and Transcriptional Activity.

Walters TS(1), McIntosh DJ(1), Ingram SM(2), Tillery L(2), Motley ED(2), Arinze
IJ(1), Misra S(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cancer Biology, Neuroscience and Pharmacology,
School of Medicine, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Physiology, School of Medicine,
Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Physiology, School of Medicine,
Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN, USA, smisra@mmc.edu.
(4)School of Graduate Studies and Research, Meharry Medical College, Nashville
TN, USA.
(5)Center for Women's Health, Meharry Medical College, Nashville TN, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a
transcription factor that binds to the antioxidant response element(s) (ARE) in
target gene promoters, enabling oxidatively stressed cells to respond in order to
restore redox homeostasis. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) that mediate
activation of Nrf2, in the cytosol and its release from Keap1, have been
extensively studied but PTMs that impact its biology after activation are
beginning to emerge. In this regard, PTMs like acetylation, phosphorylation,
ubiquitination and sumoylation contribute towards the Nrf2 subcellular
localization, and its transactivation function. We previously demonstrated that
Nrf2 traffics to the promyelocytic leukemia-nuclear bodies (PML-NB), where it is 
a target for modification by small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) proteins
(sumoylation), but the site(s) for SUMO conjugation have not been determined. In 
this study, we aim to identify SUMO-2 conjugation site(s) and explore the impact,
sumoylation of the site(s) have on Nrf2 stability, nuclear localization and
transcriptional activation of its target gene expression upon oxidative stress.
METHODS: The putative SUMO-binding sites in Nrf2 for human isoform1 (NP_006155.2)
and mouse homolog (NP_035032.1) were identified using a computer-based
SUMO-predictive software (SUMOplot™). Site-directed mutagenesis, immunoblot
analysis, and ARE-mediated reporter gene assays were used to assess the impact of
sumoylation on these site(s) in vitro. Effect of mutation of these sumoylation
sites of Nrf2 on expression of Heme Oxygenase1 (HO-1) was determined in HEK293T
cell.
RESULTS:  Eight putative sumoylation sites were identified by SUMOplot™ analysis.
Out of the eight predicted sites only one 532LKDE535 of human (h) and its
homologous 524LKDE527 of mouse (m) Nrf2, exactly matches the SUMO-binding
consensus motif. The other high probability SUMO-acceptor site identified was
residue K110, in the motifs 109PKSD112 and 109PKQD112 of human and mouse Nrf2,
respectively. Mutational analysis of putative sumoylation sites (human (h)/mouse 
(m) K110, hK533 and mK525) showed that these residues are needed for SUMO-2
conjugation, nuclear localization and ARE driven transcription of reporter genes 
and the endogenous HO-1 expression by Nrf2. These residues also stabilized Nrf2, 
as evident from shorter half-lives of the mutant protein compared to wild-type
Nrf2.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that SUMO-2 mediated sumoylation of K110 and
K533 in human Nrf2 regulates in part its transcriptional activity by enhancing
its stabilization and nuclear localization.

© Copyright by the Author(s). Published by Cell Physiol Biochem Press.

DOI: 10.33594/000000351 
PMID: 33770425 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest with the contents of this article.

