
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Mar 12;12:641440. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.641440.
eCollection 2021.

A Bifan Motif Shaped by ArsR1, ArsR2, and Their Cognate Promoters Frames Arsenic 
Tolerance of Pseudomonas putida.

Durante-Rodríguez G(1), Páez-Espino D(1), de Lorenzo V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Department, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología-CSIC, Madrid,
Spain.

Prokaryotic tolerance to inorganic arsenic is a widespread trait habitually
determined by operons encoding an As (III)-responsive repressor (ArsR), an As
(V)-reductase (ArsC), and an As (III)-export pump (ArsB), often accompanied by
other complementary genes. Enigmatically, the genomes of many environmental
bacteria typically contain two or more copies of this basic genetic device
arsRBC. To shed some light on the logic of such apparently unnecessary
duplication(s) we have inspected the regulation-together and by separate-of the
two ars clusters borne by the soil bacterium Pseudomonas putida strain KT2440, in
particular the cross talk between the two repressors ArsR1/ArsR2 and the
respective promoters. DNase I footprinting and gel retardation analyses of Pars1 
and Pars2 with their matching regulators revealed non-identical binding sequences
and interaction patterns for each of the systems. However, in vitro transcription
experiments exposed that the repressors could downregulate each other's
promoters, albeit within a different set of parameters. The regulatory frame that
emerges from these data corresponds to a particular type of bifan motif where all
key interactions have a negative sign. The distinct regulatory architecture that 
stems from coexistence of various ArsR variants in the same cells could enter an 
adaptive advantage that favors the maintenance of the two proteins as separate
repressors.

Copyright © 2021 Durante-Rodríguez, Páez-Espino and de Lorenzo.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.641440 
PMCID: PMC7994332
PMID: 33776973 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

