
1. Cytokine. 2021 Jun;142:155501. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155501. Epub 2021 Mar 26.

Acetate ameliorates nephrotoxicity in streptozotocin-nicotinamide-induced
diabetic rats: Involvement of xanthine oxidase activity.

Olaniyi KS(1), Amusa OA(2), Akinnagbe NT(2), Ajadi IO(3), Ajadi MB(4), Agunbiade 
TB(5), Michael OS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cardio/Repro-metabolic and Microbiome Research Unit, Department of Physiology,
College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Afe Babalola University, Ado-Ekiti
360101, Nigeria; School of Laboratory Medicine & Medical Sciences, Nelson R
Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Private Bag X54001,
Congella 4013, Westville, Durban, South Africa. Electronic address:
olaniyisk@abuad.edu.ng.
(2)Cardio/Repro-metabolic and Microbiome Research Unit, Department of Physiology,
College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Afe Babalola University, Ado-Ekiti
360101, Nigeria.
(3)School of Laboratory Medicine & Medical Sciences, Nelson R Mandela School of
Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Private Bag X54001, Congella 4013,
Westville, Durban, South Africa.
(4)Department of Chemical Pathology, College of Health Sciences, Ladoke Akintola 
University of Technology, Ogbomoso, Nigeria; Department of Medical Biochemistry, 
School of Laboratory Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Private Bag X54001,
Congella 4013, Westville, Durban, South Africa.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, College of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Afe Babalola University, Ado-Ekiti 360101, Nigeria.
(6)Cardiometabolic Research Unit, Department of Physiology, College of Health
Sciences, Bowen University, Iwo, Nigeria.

Impaired renal function is a common complication of diabetes mellitus (DM) that
often degenerates to cardiovascular disease, contributing to high morbidity and
reduced survival worldwide. Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), including acetate
has shown potential benefits in glycemic or metabolic regulation but its effect
on diabetes-associated renal toxicity/impairment is not clear. Herein, we
investigated the hypothesis that acetate would ameliorate renal toxicity,
accompanying DM, possibly by suppression of xanthine oxidase (XO) activity. Adult
male Wistar rats (230-260 g) were allotted into groups (n = 6/group) namely:
control (vehicle; po), sodium acetate (NaAc)-treated (200 mg/kg), diabetic with
or without NaAc groups. DM was induced by intraperitoneal injection of
streptozotocin 65 mg/kg after a dose of nicotinamide (110 mg/kg). Diabetic
animals showed increased fasting glucose and insulin, renal triglyceride, total
cholesterol, atherogenic lipid, malondialdehyde, XO, tissue necrosis factor-α,
uric acid, interleukin-6, aspartate transaminase/alanine aminotransferase ratio, 
gamma-glutamyl transferase and decreased glutathione and nitric oxide
concentration. The renal tissue was characterized with disrupted tissue
architecture, enlarged Bowman's space, congested glomeruli and adherence of
abnormal segments of tuft to Bowman's capsule with consequent elevated serum
creatinine and urea concentration. However, these alterations were attenuated by 
NaAc. The study demonstrates that acetate ameliorates diabetes-induced
nephrotoxicity, which is associated with suppressed XO and its accompanied
pro-inflammatory mediators. Therefore, SCFAs, acetate would be a promising
dietary-derived therapeutic agent for the prevention and management of
diabetes-associated renal disturbances.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155501 
PMID: 33775493 

