
1. Mult Scler. 2021 Mar 30:13524585211003301. doi: 10.1177/13524585211003301. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Anti-CD20 therapy corrects a CD8 regulatory T cell deficit in multiple sclerosis.

Howlett-Prieto Q(1), Feng X(1), Kramer JF(2), Kramer KJ(3), Houston TW(1), Reder 
AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)St Thomas Medical Partners, Neurology, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of long-term anti-CD20 B-cell-depleting
treatment on regulatory T cell immune subsets that are subnormal in untreated MS 
patients.
METHODS: 30 clinically stable MS patients, before and over 38 months of
ocrelizumab treatment, were compared to 13 healthy controls, 29 therapy-naïve MS,
9 interferon-β-treated MS, 3 rituximab-treated MS, and 3 rituximab-treated
patients with other autoimmune inflammatory diseases. CD8, CD28, CD4, and FOXP3
expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells was quantitated with flow
cytometry.
RESULTS: CD8+ CD28- regulatory cells rose from one-third of healthy control
levels before ocrelizumab treatment (2.68% vs 7.98%), normalized by 12 months
(13.5%), and rose to 2.4-fold above healthy controls after 18 months of
ocrelizumab therapy (19.0%). CD4+ FOXP3+ regulatory cells were lower in MS than
in healthy controls (7.98%) and showed slight long-term decreases with
ocrelizumab. CD8+ CD28- and CD4+ FOXP3+ regulatory T cell percentages in
IFN-β-treated MS patients were between those of untreated MS and healthy
controls.
INTERPRETATION: Long-term treatment with ocrelizumab markedly enriches CD8+ CD28-
regulatory T cells and corrects the low levels seen in MS before treatment, while
slightly decreasing CD4+ FOXP3+ regulatory T cells. Homeostatic enrichment of
regulatory CD8 T cells provides a mechanism, in addition to B cell depletion, for
the benefits of anti-CD20 treatment in MS.

DOI: 10.1177/13524585211003301 
PMID: 33783270 

