
1. Leukemia. 2021 Mar 29. doi: 10.1038/s41375-021-01224-2. [Epub ahead of print]

Downregulation of MTSS1 in acute myeloid leukemia is associated with a poor
prognosis, chemotherapy resistance, and disease aggressiveness.

Grandits AM(1)(2), Nguyen CH(1)(2), Schlerka A(1)(2), Hackl H(3), Sill H(4),
Etzler J(1)(2), Heyes E(5), Stoiber D(6), Grebien F(5), Heller G(#)(1)(2), Wieser
R(#)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Institute of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, Medical University of Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria.
(4)Division of Hematology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(5)Institute for Medical Biochemistry, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna,
Austria.
(6)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and
Microbiology, Karl Landsteiner University of Health Sciences, Krems, Austria.
(7)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria. rotraud.wieser@meduniwien.ac.at.
(8)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Vienna, Austria. rotraud.wieser@meduniwien.ac.at.
(#)Contributed equally

Despite recent approval of targeted drugs for acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
therapy, chemotherapy with cytosine arabinoside and anthracyclines remains an
important pillar of treatment. Both primary and secondary resistance are frequent
and associated with poor survival, yet the underlying molecular mechanisms are
incompletely understood. In previous work, we identified genes deregulated
between diagnosis and relapse of AML, corresponding to therapy na√Øve and
resistant states, respectively. Among them was MTSS1, whose downregulation is
known to enhance aggressiveness of solid tumors. Here we show that low MTSS1
expression at diagnosis was associated with a poor prognosis in AML. MTSS1
expression was regulated by promoter methylation, and reduced by cytosine
arabinoside and the anthracycline daunorubicin. Experimental downregulation of
MTSS1 affected the expression of numerous genes. It induced the DNA damage
response kinase WEE1, and rendered human AML cell lines more resistant to
cytosine arabinoside, daunorubicin, and other anti-cancer drugs. Mtss1 knockdown 
in murine MLL-AF9-driven AML substantially decreased disease latency, and
increased leukemic burden and ex vivo chemotherapy resistance. In summary, low
MTSS1 expression represents a novel factor contributing to disease
aggressiveness, therapy resistance, and poor outcome in AML.

DOI: 10.1038/s41375-021-01224-2 
PMID: 33782537 

