
1. J Mol Graph Model. 2021 Mar 20;105:107903. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2021.107903. [Epub
ahead of print]

Virtual screening-based identification of novel fatty acid synthase inhibitor and
evaluation of its antiproliferative activity in breast cancer cells.

Amrutha Nisthul A(1), Archana PR(2), Anto RJ(3), Sadasivan C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Microbiology, Kannur University, Thalassery
Campus, Kannur, 670661, Kerala, India. Electronic address:
amruthanisthul@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Cancer Research, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram, 695014, Kerala, India. Electronic address:
archanapr896@gmail.com.
(3)Division of Cancer Research, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram, 695014, Kerala, India. Electronic address:
rjanto@rgcb.res.in.
(4)Department of Biotechnology and Microbiology, Kannur University, Thalassery
Campus, Kannur, 670661, Kerala, India. Electronic address: csadasivan@gmail.com.

Cancer cells activate de novo lipogenesis by overexpressing the lipogenic enzymes
ACLY, ACC and FASN to support rapid cell division. FASN, previously known as
oncogenic antigen-519 (OA-519) catalyzes seven sequential reactions to synthesize
palmitic acid (C16) from substrates acetyl CoA, and malonyl CoA. The dependence
of cancer cells on FASN-derived lipids and the differential expression of FASN in
cancer cells compared to their normal counterparts make it an attractive
metabolic drug target in cancer therapy. In the present study, an attempt has
been made to identify potent FASN inhibitors from Asinex-Synergy compound
database using structure-based virtual screening. The serial docking protocols of
increasing precisions identified LEG-17649942, with glide score -10.34 kcal/mol
as a promising compound which can directly interact with active site residues
H293 and H331. LEG-17649942 possesses drug-like pharmacokinetic properties as
predicted by Qikprop. LEG-17649942 exhibited cytotoxicity in breast cancer cell
lines SK-BR-3, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 with maximum activity against
MDA-MB-231 cells with IC50 of 50 μM. The study put forward LEG-17649942 as a
novel drug-lead compound against triple negative breast cancer with an exquisite 
binding pattern to FASN-KS domain.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2021.107903 
PMID: 33780787 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

