
1. J Struct Biol. 2021 Mar 26:107730. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2021.107730. [Epub ahead of
print]

Resolving the activation mechanism of the D99N antiterminator LicT protein.

Yang Y(1), Gracy J(1), Declerck N(2), Déméné H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biochimie Structurale, CNRS, INSERM, Université de Montpellier, 29
rue de Navacelles, 34090 Montpellier, France.
(2)Centre de Biochimie Structurale, CNRS, INSERM, Université de Montpellier, 29
rue de Navacelles, 34090 Montpellier, France; INRAE, département MICA, 78352
Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(3)Centre de Biochimie Structurale, CNRS, INSERM, Université de Montpellier, 29
rue de Navacelles, 34090 Montpellier, France. Electronic address:
helene.demene@cbs.cnrs.fr.

LicT is an antiterminator protein of the BglG family whose members are key
players in the control of carbohydrate catabolism in bacteria. These
antiterminators are generally composed of three modules, an N-terminal
RNA-binding domain (CAT) followed by two homologous regulation modules (PRD1 and 
PRD2) that control the RNA binding activity of the effector domain via
phosphorylation on conserved histidines. Although several structures of isolated 
domains of BglG-like proteins have been described, no structure containing CAT
and at least one PRD simultaneously has yet been reported in an active state,
precluding detailed understanding of signal transduction between modules. To
fulfill this gap, we recently reported the complete NMR sequence assignment of a 
constitutively active mutant (D99N) CAT-PRD1*, which contains the effector domain
and the first regulation domain of LicT. As a follow-up, we have determined and
report here the 3D solution structure of this active, dimeric LicT construct (40 
kDa). The structure reveals how the mutation constrains the PRD1 regulation
domain into an active conformation which is transduced to CAT via a network of
negatively charged residues belonging to PRD1 dimeric interface and to the linker
region. In addition, our data support a model where BglG-type antitermination
regulatory modules can only adopt a single conformation compatible with the
active structure of the effector domain, regardless of whether activation is
mediated by mutation on the first or second PRD. The linker between the effector 
and regulation modules appears to function as an adaptable hinge tuning the
position of the functional modules.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2021.107730 
PMID: 33781896 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

