
1. Bioengineered. 2021 Dec;12(1):1054-1065. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1902697.

Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) to explore genes responsive 
to Streptococcus oralis biofilm and immune infiltration analysis in human
gingival fibroblasts cells.

Chen X(1), Ma J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Affiliated Yueqing Hospital, Wenzhou Medical
University; Institute of Stomatology, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Prosthodontics, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.

The correlation between oral bacteria and dental implants failure has been
reported. However, the effect and mechanism of bacteria during dental implants is
unclear. In this study, we explored key genes and candidate gene clusters in
human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) cells in response to Streptococcus oralis
biofilm through weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) and
differential genes analysis using gene expression matrix, GSE134481, downloaded
from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. We obtained 325 genes in the
module significantly associated with S. oralis infection and 113 differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in the S. oralis biofilm; 62 DEGs indicated significant
correlation with S. oralis injury. Multiple immune pathways, such as the tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) signaling pathway, were considerably enriched. We obtained 
a candidate genes cluster containing 12 genes - IL6, JUN, FOS, CSF2, HBEGF, EDN1,
CCL2, MYC, NGF, SOCS3, CXCL1, and CXCL2; we observed 5 candidate hub genes
associated with S. oralis infection - JUN, IL6, FOS, MYC, and CCL2. The fraction 
of macrophage M0 cells was significantly increased in biofilm treatment compared 
with control; expression of FOS and MYC was significantly positively correlated
with macrophage M0 cells. Our findings present a fierce inflammation changes in
the transcript level of HGF in response to S. oralis.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1902697 
PMID: 33781179 

