
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Mar 15;9:626095. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.626095.
eCollection 2021.

How the Discovery of the CD4/CD8-p56lck Complexes Changed Immunology and
Immunotherapy.

Rudd CE(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology-Oncology, Centre de Recherche Hôpital
Maisonneuve-Rosemont (CR-HMR), Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Infection and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Medicine, McGill University
Health Center, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The past 25 years have seen enormous progress in uncovering the receptors and
signaling mechanisms on T-cells that activate their various effecter functions.
Until the late 1980s, most studies on T-cells had focused on the influx of
calcium and the levels of cAMP/GMP in T-cells. My laboratory then uncovered the
interaction of CD4 and CD8 co-receptors with the protein-tyrosine kinase p56lck
which are now widely accepted as the initiators of the tyrosine phosphorylation
cascade leading to T-cell activation. The finding explained how immune
recognition receptors expressed by many immune cells, which lack intrinsic
catalytic activity, can transduce activation signals via non-covalent association
with non-receptor tyrosine kinases. The discovery also established the concept
that a protein tyrosine phosphorylation cascade operated in T-cells. In this
vein, we and others then showed that the CD4- and CD8-p56lck complexes
phosphorylate the TCR complexes which led to the identification of other
protein-tyrosine kinases such as ZAP-70 and an array of substrates that are now
central to studies in T-cell immunity. Other receptors such as B-cell receptor,
Fc receptors and others were also subsequently found to use src kinases to
control cell growth. In T-cells, p56lck driven phosphorylation targets include
co-receptors such as CD28 and CTLA-4 and immune cell-specific adaptor proteins
such as LAT and SLP-76 which act to integrate signals proximal to surface
receptors. CD4/CD8-p56lck regulated events in T-cells include intracellular
calcium mobilization, integrin activation and the induction of transcription
factors for gene expression. Lastly, the identification of the targets of p56lck 
in the TCR and CD28 provided the framework for the development of chimeric
antigen receptor (CAR) therapy in the treatment of cancer. In this review, I
outline a history of the development of events that led to the development of the
"TCR signaling paradigm" and its implications to immunology and immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2021 Rudd.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.626095 
PMCID: PMC8005572
PMID: 33791292 

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

