
1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Mar 10;13(6). pii: 1195. doi: 10.3390/cancers13061195.

TAM Receptor Inhibition-Implications for Cancer and the Immune System.

Aehnlich P(1), Powell RM(1), Peeters MJW(1), Rahbech A(1), Thor Straten P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Cancer Immune Therapy (CCIT-DK), Department of Oncology,
Copenhagen University Hospital Herlev, 2730 Herlev, Denmark.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Tyro3, Axl and MerTK (TAM) receptors are receptor tyrosine kinases which play
important roles in efferocytosis and in the balancing of immune responses and
inflammation. TAM receptor activation is induced upon binding of the ligands
protein S (Pros1) or growth arrest-specific protein 6 (Gas6) which act as
bridging molecules for binding of phosphatidyl serine (PtdSer) exposed on
apoptotic cell membranes. Upon clearance of apoptotic cell material, TAM receptor
activation on innate cells suppresses proinflammatory functions, thereby ensuring
the immunologically silent removal of apoptotic material in the absence of
deleterious immune responses. However, in T cells, MerTK signaling is
costimulatory and promotes activation and functional output of the cell. MerTK
and Axl are also aberrantly expressed in a range of both hematological and solid 
tumor malignancies, including breast, lung, melanoma and acute myeloid leukemia, 
where they have a role in oncogenic signaling. Consequently, TAM receptors are
being investigated as therapeutic targets using small molecule inhibitors and
have already demonstrated efficacy in mouse tumor models. Thus, inhibition of TAM
signaling in cancer cells could have therapeutic value but given the opposing
roles of TAM signaling in innate cells and T cells, TAM inhibition could also
jeopardize anticancer immune responses. This conflict is discussed in this
review, describing the effects of TAM inhibition on cancer cells as well as
immune cells, while also examining the intricate interplay of cancer and immune
cells in the tumor microenvironment.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13061195 
PMCID: PMC7998716
PMID: 33801886 

