
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Mar 24;22(7). pii: 3317. doi: 10.3390/ijms22073317.

Deciphering the Binding Interactions between Acinetobacter baumannii ACP and
β-ketoacyl ACP Synthase III to Improve Antibiotic Targeting Using NMR
Spectroscopy.

Choi S(1), Park J(1), Yeon J(1), Jang A(1), Lee WC(1), Kim Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul 05029,
Korea.

Fatty acid synthesis is essential for bacterial viability. Thus, fatty acid
synthases (FASs) represent effective targets for antibiotics. Nevertheless,
multidrug-resistant bacteria, including the human opportunistic bacteria,
Acinetobacter baumannii, are emerging threats. Meanwhile, the FAS pathway of A.
baumannii is relatively unexplored. Considering that acyl carrier protein (ACP)
has an important role in the delivery of fatty acyl intermediates to other FAS
enzymes, we elucidated the solution structure of A. baumannii ACP (AbACP) and,
using NMR spectroscopy, investigated its interactions with β-ketoacyl ACP
synthase III (AbKAS III), which initiates fatty acid elongation. The results show
that AbACP comprises four helices, while Ca2+ reduces the electrostatic repulsion
between acid residues, and the unconserved F47 plays a key role in thermal
stability. Moreover, AbACP exhibits flexibility near the hydrophobic cavity
entrance from D59 to T65, as well as in the α1α2 loop region. Further, F29 and
A69 participate in slow exchanges, which may be related to shuttling of the
growing acyl chain. Additionally, electrostatic interactions occur between the α2
and α3-helix of ACP and AbKAS III, while the hydrophobic interactions through the
ACP α2-helix are seemingly important. Our study provides insights for development
of potent antibiotics capable of inhibiting A. baumannii FAS protein-protein
interactions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22073317 
PMCID: PMC8036411
PMID: 33805050 

