
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Mar 16;12:605984. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.605984.
eCollection 2021.

Identification of Novel Sensitive and Reliable Serovar-Specific Targets for PCR
Detection of Salmonella Serovars Hadar and Albany by Pan-Genome Analysis.

Ye Q(1), Shang Y(1), Chen M(1), Pang R(1), Li F(1), Xiang X(1), Wang C(1), Zhou
B(1), Zhang S(1), Zhang J(1), Yang X(1), Xue L(1), Ding Y(2), Wu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Microbial Safety and Health, State Key 
Laboratory of Applied Microbiology Southern China, Institute of Microbiology,
Guangdong Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Food Science & Technology, Jinan University, Institute of Food
Safety & Nutrition, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.

The accurate and rapid classification of Salmonella serovars is an essential
focus for the identification of isolates involved in disease in humans and
animals. The purpose of current research was to identify novel sensitive and
reliable serovar-specific targets and to develop PCR method for Salmonella C2
serogroups (O:8 epitopes) in food samples to facilitate timely treatment. A total
of 575 genomic sequences of 16 target serovars belonging to serogroup C2 and 150 
genomic sequences of non-target serovars were analysed by pan-genome analysis. As
a result, four and three specific genes were found for serovars Albany and Hadar,
respectively. Primer sets for PCR targeting these serovar-specific genes were
designed and evaluated based on their specificity; the results showed high
specificity (100%). The sensitivity of the specific PCR was 2.8 × 101-103 CFU/mL 
and 2.3 × 103-104 CFU/mL for serovars Albany and Hadar, respectively, and the
detection limits were 1.04 × 103-104 CFU/g and 1.16 × 104-105 CFU/g in
artificially contaminated raw pork samples. Furthermore, the potential functions 
of these serovar-specific genes were analysed; all of the genes were functionally
unknown, except for one specific serovar Albany gene known to be a encoded
secreted protein and one specific gene for serovars Hadar and Albany that is a
encoded membrane protein. Thus, these findings demonstrate that pan-genome
analysis is a precious method for mining new high-quality serovar-targets for PCR
assays or other molecular methods that are highly sensitive and can be used for
rapid detection of Salmonella serovars.

Copyright © 2021 Ye, Shang, Chen, Pang, Li, Xiang, Wang, Zhou, Zhang, Zhang,
Yang, Xue, Ding and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.605984 
PMCID: PMC8011537
PMID: 33815306 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

