
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Apr 6;11(1):7518. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-87167-1.

Skin bacteria of rainbow trout antagonistic to the fish pathogen Flavobacterium
psychrophilum.

Takeuchi M(1), Fujiwara-Nagata E(2), Katayama T(3), Suetake H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), 1-8-31 Midorigaoka, Ikeda, Osaka, 563-8577, Japan.
takeuchi-mio@aist.go.jp.
(2)Faculty of Agriculture, Kindai University, 3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara, Nara,
631-8505, Japan.
(3)Institute for Geo-Resources and Environments, National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
305-8567, Japan.
(4)Faculty of Marine Science and Technology, Fukui Prefectural University, 1-1
Gakuen-cho, Obama, Fukui, 917-0003, Japan.

Rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS) and bacterial coldwater disease (BCWD) is a
globally distributed freshwater fish disease caused by Flavobacterium
psychrophilum. In spite of its importance, an effective vaccine is not still
available. Manipulation of the microbiome of skin, which is a primary infection
gate for pathogens, could be a novel countermeasure. For example, increasing the 
abundance of specific antagonistic bacteria against pathogens in fish skin might 
be effective to prevent fish disease. Here, we combined cultivation with 16S rRNA
gene amplicon sequencing to obtain insight into the skin microbiome of the
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) and searched for skin bacteria antagonistic
to F. psychrophilum. By using multiple culture media, we obtained 174 isolates
spanning 18 genera. Among them, Bosea sp. OX14 and Flavobacterium sp. GL7
respectively inhibited the growth of F. psychrophilum KU190628-78 and NCIMB
1947T, and produced antagonistic compounds of < 3 kDa in size. Sequences related 
to our isolates comprised 4.95% of skin microbial communities, and those related 
to strains OX14 and GL7 respectively comprised 1.60% and 0.17% of the skin
microbiome. Comparisons with previously published microbiome data detected
sequences related to strains OX14 and GL7 in skin of other rainbow trout and
Atlantic salmon.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-87167-1 
PMCID: PMC8024317
PMID: 33824380 

