
1. Aging (Albany NY). 2021 Apr 4;13. doi: 10.18632/aging.202810. [Epub ahead of
print]

Nuclear envelope tethering inhibits the formation of ALT-associated PML bodies in
ALT cells.

Yang CW(1), Hsieh MH(1), Sun HJ(1), Teng SC(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei 10051, Taiwan.
(2)Center of Precision Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10051,
Taiwan.

Telomere length homeostasis is essential for maintaining genomic stability and
cancer proliferation. Telomerase-negative cancer cells undergo
recombination-mediated alternative lengthening of telomeres. Telomeres associate 
with the nuclear envelope through the shelterin RAP1 and nuclear envelope SUN1
proteins. However, how the associations between telomeres and the nuclear
envelope affect the progression of telomere recombination is not understood.
Here, we show that telomere anchorage might inhibit telomere-telomere
recombination. SUN1 depletion stimulates the formation of alternative lengthening
of telomeres-associated promyelocytic leukemia bodies in ALT cells. In contrast, 
overexpression of a telomere-nuclear envelope-tethering chimera protein,
RAP1-SUN1, suppresses APB formation. Moreover, inhibition of this nuclear
envelope attachment alleviates the requirement of TOP3Î± for resolving the
supercoiling pressure during telomere recombination. A coimmunoprecipitation
assay revealed that the SUN1 N-terminal nucleoplasmic domain interacts with the
RAP1 middle coil domain, and phosphorylation-mimetic mutations in RAP1 inhibit
this interaction. However, abolishing the RAP1-SUN1 interaction does not hinder
APB formation, which hints at the existence of another SUN1-dependent telomere
anchorage pathway. In summary, our results reveal an inhibitory role of
telomere-nuclear envelope association in telomere-telomere recombination and
imply the presence of redundant pathways for the telomere-nuclear envelope
association in ALT cells.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.202810 
PMID: 33820871 

