
1. Arch Microbiol. 2021 Apr 8. doi: 10.1007/s00203-021-02318-2. [Epub ahead of
print]

Cell surface and extracellular proteins of potentially probiotic Lactobacillus
reuteri as an effective mediator to regulate intestinal epithelial barrier
function.

Singh TP(1), Tehri N(2), Kaur G(2), Malik RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Microbiology Department, College of Dairy Science and Technology, Lala
Lajpat Rai University of Veterinary and Animal Science, Hisar, 125004, India.
88tejindersingh@gmail.com.
(2)Dairy Microbiology Division, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal,
132001, India.

The present study aimed to evaluate the potential of cell surface and
extracellular proteins in regulation of intestinal epithelial barrier (IEB)
function. Eight potentially probiotic L. reuteri strains were evaluated for
presence of mapA gene and its expression on co-culturing with the Caco-2 cells.
The ability of untreated (Viable), heat-inactivated, 5Â M LiCL treated L. reuteri 
strains as well as their cell-free supernatant (CFS) to modulate expression of
IEB function genes (hBD-2, hBD-3, claudin-1 and occludin) was also evaluated.
Caco-2 cells were treated with cell surface and extracellular protein extracts
and investigated for change in expression of targeted IEB function genes. The
results showed that mapA gene is present in all the tested L. reuteri strains and
expression of mapA and its receptors (anxA13 and palm) increase significantly on 
co-culturing of L. reuteri and Caco-2 cells. Also, up-regulated expression of IEB
function genes was observed on co-culturing of L. reuteri (viable,
heat-inactivated and CFS) and their protein extracts with Caco-2 cells in
contrast to down-regulation observed with the pathogenic strain of Salmonella
typhi. Therefore, this study concludes that the cell surface and extracellular
protein from L. reuteri act as an effective mediator molecules to regulate IEB
function.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-021-02318-2 
PMID: 33830286 

