
1. Environ Technol. 2021 Apr 10:1-22. doi: 10.1080/09593330.2021.1916088. [Epub
ahead of print]

Alkaline extracted cyanide from cassava wastewater and its sole induction of
chromosomal aberrations on Allium cepa L. root tips.

Ogunyemi AK(1), Abayomi AA(2), Opawale Rachael O(1), Samuel TA(3), Ilori MO(1),
Amund OO(4), Babajide A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, University of Lagos, Nigeria
Akoka, Lagos, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Lagos, Akoka,
Lagos, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Lagos, Idi-Araba, Lagos, Nigeria.
(4)Elizade University, Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Basic and
Applied Sciences, Ilara-Mokin, Ondo State, Nigeria.

Cassava, a staple crop in Nigeria, processed by numerous factories in rural and
sub-urban locations is known to contain some level of cyano compounds. Lack of
stringent environmental regulations on management of cassava wastewater (CWW)
from cassava processing factories had led to its indiscriminate discharge on the 
environment. CWW samples were obtained from cassava processing factories from
selected states (Lagos (A), Oyo (B), Ogun 1 (C1), Ogun 2 (C2) and Cross River
(D)) in Nigeria to determine the cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of extracted
cyanide from the wastewaters. The cyanide was hydrolyzed via chemical degradation
utilizing 1.25 M NaOH and subsequently titrated using silver nitrate with
p-dimethylaminobenzalrhodamine as indicator. Further, in order to explore the
potential toxicity of this pollutant present in the effluent, a battery of
short-term biological assay (Allium cepa chromosomal aberration test) was used.
Bulbs with roots of Allium cepa L. were treated with different concentrations
(0.05%, 0.1%, 0.2%, 0.4%, and 0.8%) of CWW, and after 48 h the root tips were
processed for cytological studies by the aceto-orcein squash procedure. The
results revealed that cyanide concentrations on re-fluxing were in the range of
1.0 mg/L and 1.3 mg/L. All concentrations induced a number of chromosomal
aberrations in the root tip cells. The mitotic index decreased significantly (p <
0.05) with increasing concentration. The cytotoxic effects showed strong
concentration dependent root growth inhibition with EC50 values of 30, 20, 37, 43
and 22 % for A, B, C1, C2 and D, after 72 h. The findings thus indicate that
alkali treatment is very efficient in degrading the cyanide content of CWW and
has shown that the combination of physico-chemical analysis along with the sole
toxicity assessment could provide valuable information about the sole toxicity of
cyanide as a chemical pollutant present in the cassava effluent.

DOI: 10.1080/09593330.2021.1916088 
PMID: 33843491 

