
1. J Bacteriol. 1988 Jul;170(7):2971-6.

Purification and properties of the inducible coenzyme A-linked butyraldehyde
dehydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum.

Palosaari NR(1), Rogers P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455.

The coenzyme A (CoA)-linked butyraldehyde dehydrogenase (BAD) from Clostridium
acetobutylicum was characterized and purified to homogeneity. The enzyme was
induced over 200-fold, coincident with a shift from an acidogenic to a
solventogenic fermentation, during batch culture growth. The increase in enzyme
activity was found to require new protein synthesis since induction was blocked
by the addition of rifampin and antibody against the purified enzyme showed the
appearance of enzyme antigen beginning at the shift of the fermentation and
increasing coordinately with the increase in enzyme specific activity. The
CoA-linked acetaldehyde dehydrogenase was copurified with BAD during an 89-fold
purification, indicating that one enzyme accounts for the synthesis of the two
aldehyde intermediates for both butanol and ethanol production. Butanol
dehydrogenase activity was clearly separate from the BAD enzyme activity on TEAE 
cellulose. A molecular weight of 115,000 was determined for the native enzyme,
and the enzyme subunit had a molecular weight of 56,000 indicating that the
active form is a homodimer. Kinetic constants were determined in both the forward
and reverse directions. In the reverse direction both the Vmax and the apparent
affinity for butyraldehyde and caproaldehyde were significantly greater than they
were for acetaldehyde, while in the forward direction, the Vmax for butyryl-CoA
was fivefold that for acetyl-CoA. These and other properties of BAD indicate that
this enzyme is distinctly different from other reported CoA-dependent aldehyde
dehydrogenases.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.170.7.2971-2976.1988 
PMCID: PMC211236
PMID: 3384801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

