
1. J Pediatr. 1987 Feb;110(2):228-33.

Genetic factors in Haemophilus influenzae type b disease susceptibility and
antibody acquisition.

Petersen GM, Silimperi DR, Rotter JI, Terasaki PI, Schanfield MS, Park MS, Ward
JI.

Because Alaskan Eskimos have the greatest known endemic risk of Haemophilus
influenzae type b (Hib) disease and represent a comparatively homogeneous
population, we selected this population to evaluate the presence or absence of an
association of 35 genetic markers (alleles or allotypes) at 12 chromosomal loci
with susceptibility to both invasive Hib disease risk and level of Hib
anticapsular antibody. We studied nearly all Alaskan Eskimo children who had had 
invasive Hib disease between 1971 and 1982 in southwestern Alaska (n = 103) and
an equivalent number of controls matched for age, race, and village of residence,
and verified not to have had proved or suspected Hib disease. We found no
significant associations with Hib disease for the single alleles of HLA-A, -B,
-C, -DR, Gm, Km, Am, Kidd, MNSs, ABO, esterase D, or glutamate pyruvate
transaminase loci. However, we observed a significant interaction of two loci,
Gm(a;..;g,s,t) allotype and HLA-DR8 (P = 0.002), with increased Hib disease
susceptibility, and an interaction of the same Gm allotype and HLA-DR5 with
decreased disease susceptibility (P = 0.01). We also compared the level of
anticapsular antibody to Hib with each genetic marker and two-locus interactions,
but no genetic association with antibody level was found. We conclude that some
genetic factors contribute to the susceptibility to invasive Hib disease in this 
population.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(87)80159-2 
PMID: 3492597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

