
1. Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique. 1986;34(2):89-99.

[Longitudinal study of the risks related to the consumption of water not
conforming to bacteriological norms].

[Article in French]

Ferley JP, Zmirou D, Collin JF, Charrel M.

A prospective follow-up study lasting 18 months in 1983-1984 was conducted in 50 
villages in order to assess the risk related to the consumption of drinking water
which did not meet the bacteriology standards. 119 physicians, 52 pharmacists and
118 primary-school teachers enumerated the cases of acute gastro-intestinal
diseases observed among a population of 29,272 inhabitants. A weekly water sample
was analysed in each village as to the presence of four indicator germs of fecal 
contamination: total plate count, total coliforms, fecal coliforms
(thermotolerant) and fecal streptococci. 1,950 cases of acute gastro-intestinal
diseases were registered by the physicians and pharmacists during a population
experience of 1,873,303 persons-weeks, i.e. an incidence density of 1.06 X 10(-3)
cases per person-week. The risk notified by the school teachers among children
aged 7 to 11 was higher: 16.3 X 10(-3) cases per child-week. The villages were
classified in 3 groups, according to the proportion of substandard samples:
"good", "intermediate", and "bad" categories. The relative risk contrasting the
"bad" and "good" villages was 3.5 for the cases notified by the physicians and
the pharmacists among the general population (95% confidence interval = 2.5-4.8);
it was 1.7 for the cases reported by the teachers among the children (95%
confidence interval = 1.5-1.9). This concordant difference was very significant
but not constant across the 18 months of the survey. The authors conclude that
the bacteriology standards are a relevant indicator of a health hazard.


PMID: 3738071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

