
1. Chem Biol Interact. 1979 May;25(2-3):157-75.

Metabolic and mutagenicity studies on DDT and 15 derivatives. Detection of
1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2,2-dichloroethane and
1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2,2,2-trichloroethyl acetate (kelthane acetate) as
mutagens in Salmonella typhimurium and of 1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl) ethylene oxide,
a likely metabolite, as an alkylating agent.

Planche G, Croisy A, Malaveille C, Tomatis L, Bartsch H.

Using a novel in vitro technique, whereby microsomal enzymes were embedded in an 
agar layer to prolong their viability, 1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl) ethylene(DDNU), a 
mammalian metabolite of 1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2,2,2-trichloroethane (DDT), was 
converted by microsomal mono-oxygenases of mouse liver into
1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-1,2-ethanediol (DDNU-diol). The putative epoxide
intermediate, 1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethylene oxide (DDNU-oxide), a new compound,
was synthesized; it showed weak alkylating activity with
4-(4-nitrobenzyl)pyridine but was not mutagenic in Salmonella typhimurium strains
TA100 and TA98. DDT and 13 of its metabolites or putative synthetic derivatives, 
including 1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2,2-dichloroethylene (DDE), 1
1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2-chloroethylene (DDMU),
1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2-chloroethane (DDMS)-DDNU,
2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethanol (DDOH), bis(p-chlorophenyl)acetic acid (DDA) and
1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2,2,2-trichloroethanol (Kethane), caused no mutagenic
effects in S. typhimurium strains TA100 or TA98, either in the presence or
absence of a mouse-liver microsomal fraction.
1,1-Bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2,2,2-trichloroethyl acetate (Kelthane acetate) was a
direct-acting mutagen in strain TA100, whereas
1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2,2-dichloroethane (DDD) was mutagenic in TA98, only in
the presence of a mouse-liver microsomal system. The results are discussed in
relation to possible pathways whereby DDT is activated to mutagenic and/or
carcinogenic metabolites.

DOI: 10.1016/0009-2797(79)90043-7 
PMID: 380827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

