
1. Biochemistry. 1985 Aug 27;24(18):4931-8.

Identification of the site of cross-linking in 16S rRNA of an aromatic azide
photoaffinity probe attached to the 5'-anticodon base of A site bound tRNA.

Ciesiolka J, Gornicki P, Ofengand J.

The site of Escherichia coli 16S ribosomal RNA cross-linked to the 5'-anticodon
base of A site bound E. coli valyl-tRNA was identified. Cross-linking was via the
affinity probe 6-[(2-nitro-4-azidophenyl)amino]caproate (NAK) or
3-[[2-[(2-nitro-4-azidophenyl)amino]ethyl]dithio]propionate (SNAP) attached to
the carboxyl group of the 5'-anticodon base 5-(carboxyethoxy)uridine via an
ethylenediamine spacer [Gornicki, P., Ciesiolka, J., & Ofengand, J. (1985)
Biochemistry (preceding paper in this issue)]. With both probes, RNase T1
digestion of the isolated 16S RNA-tRNA covalent complex, 5'-32P postlabeling, and
gel electrophoresis yielded two oligonucleotides larger than any fragments from
non-cross-linked tRNA or rRNA. Appearance of the oligomers was dependent on the
presence of the probe on the tRNA. Unmodified tRNA in the A and/or P sites did
not yield any product. The presence of elongation factor Tu in the incubation
mixture was also required. Dithiothreitol (DDT) treatment of the SNAP-induced
covalent complex prior to electrophoresis also abolished the oligomers. Only the 
larger of the two oligomers (present in a 3:1 ratio) was sequenced. The SNAP
dimer was cleaved with DTT, and the rRNA and tRNA oligomers were separated and
sequenced as monomers. The NAK dimer was sequenced without cleavage by taking
advantage of the differences in electrophoretic mobility among sequence and/or
composition isomers of the same length. In both cases, the rRNA oligomer was
identified as UACACACCG1401, and the nucleotide cross-linked was shown to be the 
C1400 residue. The expected tRNA modification site was also identified.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00339a031 
PMID: 3907696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

