
1. Vet Med (Praha). 1985 Jun;30(6):359-72.

[The incidence and seasonal dynamics of yersinioses (Y. pseudotuberculosis, Y.
enterocolitica), staphylococcoses and pasteurelloses in hares from 1976 to 1982].

[Article in Czech]

StÄ•rba F.

In the years 1976-1982, 2071 dead hares from 64 districts of the Czech Socialist 
Republic were examined. The diseases under study killed 400 hares (19.3%).
Pseudotuberculosis which killed 210 hares (10.14%) from 46 districts of the Czech
Socialist Republic (71.9%) is considered as the most important hare population
regulator. The highest occurrence of diseases was recorded in 1978.
Pseudotuberculosis was of seasonal nature with the highest incidence in November 
and December. The second most widespread disease was pasteurellosis which killed 
126 hares (6.08%) from 36 districts of the Czech Socialist Republic (56.3%). This
disease dominated in 1976 and occurred seasonally, the highest incidence being
recorded in autumn (November), winter (January) and spring (March). The
infections induced by the bacteria Yersinia enterocolitica were not very
widespread and killed 32 hares (1.45%) from 20 districts of the Czech Socialist
Republic (31.3%). The highest number of cases was recorded in 1977. The monthly
pattern of the development of the disease had three peaks - in November, January 
and April. Staphylococcosis killed 32 hares (1.54%) from 14 districts in the
Czech Socialist Republic (21.9%). The highest number of cases was recorded in
1976. The disease occurred throughout the year with the highest incidence in
November, April and February. This seasonal dynamics correlated positively with
the worsened natural conditions for hare's life and with the reduction of the
natural resistance of their organisms. A particular negative influence was
exerted by bad climatic and food conditions, and by the monodietary type of
nutrition in the autumn fasting period. The disease occurrence was also examined 
in relation to the animals' age; besides the infections with the Y.
enterocolitica bacteria, the diseases prevailed in the adult individuals, which
was partly due to the higher proportion of adult animals among the hares
investigated.


PMID: 3927559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

