
1. Cancer. 1985 Nov 1;56(9):2194-200.

The serologic response of patients with stage II melanoma to allogeneic melanoma 
cell vaccines.

Livingston PO, Kaelin K, Pinsky CM, Oettgen HF, Old LJ.

Seventeen patients with Stage II malignant melanoma were treated with vaccines
prepared from three allogeneic melanoma cell lines in an attempt to induce a
humoral immune response against melanoma cell surface antigens. The patients were
free of detectable melanoma at the time of vaccination. Vaccines were prepared
from three melanoma cell lines that expressed highly restricted melanocyte
differentiation antigens. One of these cell lines also expressed an antigen found
only on this particular line. The antigens were initially identified by
antibodies in autologous serum; they were thus known to be recognized by the
human immune system. In addition, two of the cell lines expressed HLA-A, -B, -C, 
and -DR antigens; no HLA antigens were detectable on the third line. The vaccines
were administered sequentially by subcutaneous injection, mixed with bacillus
Calmette-Guerin (BCG) or Corynebacterium parvum. The patients' sera were tested
for antibodies against cell surface antigens of the vaccine cells in protein A
assays and immune adherence assays, and the specificity of observed reactions was
defined by absorption tests. Antibodies against alloantigens of the vaccine cells
developed in 16 patients and in 15 patients, against antigens related to fetal
calf serum in the culture medium. The magnitude of the antibody response to
alloantigens varied considerably, with no difference between patients who
received BCG or C. parvum with their vaccines. Antibodies against the restricted 
melanocyte differentiation antigens or the unique melanoma antigen expressed by
the vaccine cells were not detected.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0142(19851101)56:9<2194::aid-cncr2820560910>3.0.co;2-l 
PMID: 4052966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

