
1. Biochem J. 1972 Oct;129(5):1063-70.

Mössbauer effect in rubredoxin. Determination of the hyperfine field of the iron 
in a simple iron-sulphur protein.

Rao KK, Evans MC, Cammack R, Hall DO, Thompson CL, Jackson PJ, Johnson CE.

1. Rubredoxin isolated from the green photosynthetic bacterium Chloropseudomonas 
ethylica was similar in composition to those from anaerobic fermentative
bacteria. Amino acid analysis indicated a minimum molecular weight of 6352 with
one iron atom per molecule. 2. The circular-dichroism and
electron-paramagnetic-resonance spectra of Ch. ethylica rubredoxin showed many
similarities to those of Clostridium pasteurianum, but suggested that there may
be subtle differences in the protein conformation about the iron atom. 3.
Mössbauer-effect measurements on rubredoxin from Cl. pasteurianum and Ch.
ethylica showed that in the oxidized state the iron (high-spin Fe(3+)) has a
hyperfine field of 370+/-3kG, whereas in the reduced state (high-spin Fe(2+)) the
hyperfine field tensor is anisotropic with a component perpendicular to the
symmetry axis of the ion of about -200kG. For the reduced protein the sign of the
electric-field gradient is negative, i.e. the ground state of the Fe(2+) is a
[unk] orbital. There is a large non-cubic ligand-field splitting (Delta/k=900
degrees K), and a small spin-orbit splitting (D~+4.4cm(-1)) of the Fe(2+) levels.
4. The contributions of core polarization to the hyperfine field in the Fe(3+)
and Fe(2+) ions are estimated to be -370 and -300kG respectively. 5. The
significance of these results in interpretation of the Mössbauer spectra of other
iron-sulphur proteins is discussed.

DOI: 10.1042/bj1291063 
PMCID: PMC1174263
PMID: 4348167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

