
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1974 May;71(5):1612-7.

Chemical carcinogens as frameshift mutagens: Salmonella DNA sequence sensitive to
mutagenesis by polycyclic carcinogens.

Isono K, Yourno J.

Other investigators have shown that several polycyclic carcinogens are frameshift
mutagens in Salmonella. Mutagenic potency of these compounds is assessed by
ability to induce reversion of histidine-requiring frameshift mutants to
prototrophy. One frameshift mutation in the histidinol dehydrogenase gene,
hisD3052, is unusually sensitive to mutagenesis by certain polycyclic
carcinogens. We find that the 3052 mutation is a - 1 deletion, probably loss of a
G.C pair from a DNA repeat of [unk]. The polycyclic carcinogens tested (e.g.,
2-nitroso-fluorene) revert 3052 by deleting a [unk] doublet from the DNA sequence
[unk], which is close to the 3052 site. This rare mispairing-prone sequence
represents the carcinogen-sensitive "hotspot" in 3052. The ICR compounds,
noncarcinogenic intercalating agents, show a broader specificity of mutagenesis. 
Reversion with these mutagens occurs predominantly by two mechanisms: one
identical to that of the polycyclic carcinogens, and the other by +1 additions in
a third DNA tract narrowly separated from the 3052 site. The alkylating
carcinogen N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine appears to have a similar dual
specificity. DNA base changes in 3052 revertants have been correlated with
properties of histidinol dehydrogenase in crude extracts. This correlation of DNA
base sequence with electrophoretic and other properties of the mutant proteins
allows one to analyze easily the specificity of new mutagens that mutate this
strain.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.71.5.1612 
PMCID: PMC388286
PMID: 4525453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

