
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1974 Oct;71(10):3906-10.

A role of the putidaredoxin COOH-terminus in P-450cam (cytochrome m)
hydroxylations.

Sligar SG, Debrunner PG, Lipscomb JD, Namtvedt MJ, Gunsalus IC.

Methylene hydroxylation by cytochrome P-450(cam) (cytochrome m) can be resolved
into four distinct steps: substrate addition, m(o) --> m(os); reduction, m(os)
--> m(rs); dioxygen addition, m(rs) --> m(O2) (rs); followed by a second
putidaredoxin (Pseudomonas putida ferredoxin)-mediated reduction and product
formation. The isolated ferrous oxy-substrate complex exhibits first-order decay 
kinetics with the relatively slow rate constant of k [unk] 0.01 sec(-1), at 25
degrees , without product release. Putidaredoxin addition accelerates the
decomposition with second-order kinetics, k [unk] 51,000 M(-1) sec(-1), and
initiation of product formation. Cytochrome m forms a complex with putidaredoxin 
with dissociation constant of K(D) = 3 muM. In the complete three-protein
hydroxylase system, consisting of cytochrome m, putidaredoxin, and the reductase 
(a DPNH-specific flavo-protein), camphor hydroxylation occurs with a
stoichiometry of 1 mole each of DPNH and O(2) used per mole of product formed;
the K(M) for putidaredoxin is about 4.2 muM.Putidaredoxin, on treatment with
carboxypeptidase A, loses one molecule each of tryptophan and glutamine
sequentially from the carboxy terminus to expose a terminal arginine. The
tryptophan-free product has been separated from native putidaredoxin and other
impurities, and retains the visible and electron paramagnetic resonance spectra
and the redox potential of the active center of native putidaredoxin. This
modified redoxin binds less tightly to cytochrome m, K(D) [unk] 150 muM, and is
50 times less effective in stimulation of the m(O2) (rs) decay rate. A similar
decrease in specific activity is observed in the complete hydroxylase system.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.71.10.3906 
PMCID: PMC434294
PMID: 4530269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

