
1. J Bacteriol. 1972 Jun;110(3):864-9.

Mutant of Escherichia coli K-12 deficient for detergent-resistant phospholipase
A.

Oki M, Doi O, Nojima S.

A mutant deficient for detergent-resistant (DR) phospholipase A was isolated from
Escherichia coli K-12. Because the enzyme is membrane-bound and the substrate is 
a lipid, a special procedure was developed for isolating mutants deficient for
the enzyme from agar plates. A sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-sensitive mutant was 
used as a parental strain for the isolation of DR phospholipase A-deficient
mutant. Soft agar containing an unsaturated fatty acid auxotroph and SDS was
poured over colonies of the parental strain. The cells were easily solubilized
with SDS, and phospholipids were efficiently digested by DR phospholipase A from 
the colonies on an agar plate. Fatty acids released supported the growth of the
indicator bacteria. After the cells of the parent were mutagenized with
nitrosoguanidine, colonies which could not support the growth of an unsaturated
fatty acid auxotroph in the presence of SDS were selected. Four mutants were
isolated after in vitro scre[UNK]ning of DR phospholipase A activity of 30
halo-less clones. Since an extract of the parent strain mixed with that of a
mutant strain was still active, it was concluded that the inability to hydrolyze 
phospholipids was not due to the accumulation of inhibitory substance; the
activity of DR phospholipase A in the mutant was less than 1% of the parental
activity. Physiological studies indicated that DR phospholipase A is not
essential for the growth of E. coli.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.110.3.864-869.1972 
PMCID: PMC247504
PMID: 4555415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

