
1. Appl Microbiol. 1967 Jan;15(1):67-75.

Stability and effects of some pesticides in soil.

Bartha R, Lanzilotta RP, Pramer D.

The influence of 29 pesticides on CO(2) production and nitrification by soil
microorganisms was determined. A few compounds were stable but without
significant effect in soil (chlorinated hydrocarbons), some persisted and
depressed respiration and nitrification (carbamates, cyclodienes, phenylureas,
thiolcarbamates), and others displayed toxicity but were transformed by soil
microorganisms (amides, anilides, organophosphates, phenylcarbamates, triazines).
Some compounds of the last type induced an initial increase and subsequent
decrease in CO(2) production by soil. No simple explanation of this effect is
possible, but the results of studies of model systems having established
activities suggest that in soil any one or a combination of the following
mechanisms is responsible for the observed complex relation of CO(2) production
to time: (i) a pesticide acts to uncouple oxidative phosphorylation in a manner
analogous to 2,4-dinitrophenol; (ii) a pesticide lacking antimicrobial action is 
oxidized in part and transformed to a stable and toxic product; (iii) a pesticide
that is selectively toxic inhibits CO(2) production by sensitive microorganisms
but is subject to oxidation without detoxification by other members of the
microbial population that are resistant to its initial action. Pesticide
concentrations greatly in excess of those recommended for agricultural and home
use were required to produce an effect, and supplementary organic matter
(glucose) tended to reduce pesticide toxicity and increase the microbial
degradation of pesticides in soil.


PMCID: PMC546845
PMID: 6031443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

