
1. J Biol Chem. 1984 Aug 10;259(15):9790-8.

Sequence of the small subunit of yeast carbamyl phosphate synthetase and
identification of its catalytic domain.

Nyunoya H, Lusty CJ.

The yeast gene CPA1 coding for the small subunit of arginine-specific carbamyl
phosphate synthetase has been cloned by complementation of a cpa 1 mutant with a 
plasmid library of total yeast chromosomal DNA. Two of the plasmids, pJL113/ST4
and pJL113/ST15, contain DNA inserts in opposite orientations with overlapping
sequences of 2.6 kilobases. The nucleotide sequence of a 2.2-kilobase region of
the DNA insert carrying the CPA1 gene has been determined. The CPA1 gene has been
identified to be 1233 nucleotides long and to code for a polypeptide of 411 amino
acids with a calculated molecular weight of 45,358. The amino acid sequence
encoded in CPA1 is homologous to the recently determined sequence of the small
subunit of Escherichia coli carbamyl phosphate synthetase (Piette, J., Nyunoya,
H., Lusty, C.J., Cunin, R., Weyens, G., Crabeel, M., Charlier, D., Glandsdorff,
N., and Pierard, A. (1984) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 81, 4134-4138) over the 
entire length of the polypeptide chain. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of
the small subunits of yeast and E. coli carbamyl phosphate synthetases to the
sequences of Component II of anthranilate and p-aminobenzoate synthases suggests 
that these amidotransferases are evolutionarily related. The most highly
conserved region of the yeast and E. coli enzymes includes a cysteine residue
previously found to be at the active site of Pseudomonas putida anthranilate
synthase Component II (Kawamura, M., Keim, P.S., Goto, Y., Zalkin, H., and
Heinrikson, R.L. (1978) J. Biol. Chem. 253, 4659-4668). Based on the observed
homologies in the primary sequences of the other amidotransferases examined, we
propose a 13-amino acid long sequence to be part of the catalytic domain of this 
class of enzymes.


PMID: 6086650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

