
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1984 Sep;57(3):694-702.

A study of the specificity of the direct binding between bacteria and HLA
antigens.

Maeda K, Kono D, Kobayashi S, Brenner MB, Yu DT.

In the first step of the present study we re-examined the question whether HLA
class I molecules isolated from human lymphocytes can bind to intact bacteria.
HLA antigens were isolated from the lymphoblastoid cell line HOM-2 and incubated 
with the bacteria Yersina enterocolitica. Significant binding of antigens to the 
bacteria was detected whether the antigens were solubilized in the detergent NP
40, reconstituted in liposomes or presented as papain cleaved molecules. Next, we
studied the specificity of the binding. We compared the ability of NP 40
solubilized HLA antigens derived from four different cell lines, expressing
different HLA-A, -B and -C antigens, to bind to nine different strains of
bacteria. Remarkably, few differences were found in that each strain of bacteria 
bound 10-30% of the HLA antigens derived from any of the four cells lines.
Further, after a sample of HLA antigens had been incubated with one strain of
bacteria, the unbound HLA antigens would fail to bind to another strain. The
conclusions are as follows. First, we have confirmed a previous report that HLA
class I antigens could bind to bacteria. Second, binding to bacteria is mediated 
through the extracellular portion of the HLA molecules which is not affected by
papain cleavage. Third, it is the non-polymorphic areas of the HLA antigens which
are responsible, because antigens purified from cell lines with different HLA-A, 
-B and -C allotypes have similar binding ability. Lastly, the binding of bacteria
to HLA antigens is a universal phenomenon which does not distinguish one strain
of bacteria from another.


PMCID: PMC1536249
PMID: 6205801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

