
1. Infect Immun. 1982 Sep;37(3):935-9.

Requirement for an additional serum factor essential for the antibody-independent
activation of the classical complement sequence by Gram-negative bacteria.

Clas F, Loos M.

Killing of Salmonella minnesota and Salmonella typhimurium S and R strains in
serum of nonimmune humans and guinea pigs was drastically reduced in the
selective absence of C1q, C1r, Ca2+, C4, or C2, the components of the classical
complement pathway. Binding of C1 and C1q to the S form and six different
core-deficient R mutant strains became stronger the shorter the
lipopolysaccharide molecule. C1 and C1q had, under physiological conditions, no
affinity to the serum-resistant S forms, whereas these components were bound by
the serum-sensitive R forms with high affinity. However, a mixture of the
individual complement components C1-C9, which rapidly lysed sensitized
erythrocytes, did not kill the serum-sensitive bacteria. Isolated C1 bound to
these bacteria cleaved fluid-phase C4 but did not convert C2. C2 turnover could
be detected only when serum was used as a source of C1 or C4, indicating that an 
additional serum component is necessary for the antibody-independent bactericidal
effect. Functional tests indicated that this factor is a euglobulin which
mediates binding of C4 to the bacteria even in the absence of C1 or after
treatment with EDTA. Binding of C4 followed by the generation of C4b sites as
acceptors for C2 was a prerequisite for the killing of the bacteria. The factor
could not be replaced by immunoglobulin G or immunoglobulin M, nor was it blocked
by preincubation with anti-immunoglobulin G or anti-immunoglobulin M.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.37.3.935-939.1982 
PMCID: PMC347628
PMID: 6752030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

