
1. Scand J Infect Dis Suppl. 1980;Suppl 24:112-8.

Bacteria-immunoglobulin-lymphocyte interactions--new aspects.

Forsgren A, Banck G, Grubb A.

Of 30 bacterial species tested 18 stimulated DNA synthesis in human blood
lymphocytes. The maximum response was after 3-4 days of culture suggesting a
mitogenic effect. This was confirmed by the induction of polyclonal antibody
production shown by a plaque assay. Most bacterial species increased the DNA
synthesis in B-enriched lymphocytes and unseparated lymphocytes but had
negligible activity on T-enriched lymphocytes. Among bacteria with a mitogenic
effect and ability to induce polyclonal antibody production are Staphylococcus
aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Neisseria
gonorrhoeae, Streptococcus group A and Streptococcus pneumoniae. In an attempt to
define structure (s) on the B-lymphocyte surface responsible for the lymphocyte
stimulation the binding of IgD, IgM, and HLA-A, -B and HLA-D antigens to
different bacterial species was investigated. A high IgD binding to N.
catarrhalis and H. influenzae and a moderate binding of IgD to streptococci was
found. Binding studies employing radiolabelled IgD Fab- and Fc-fragments
indicated that the binding probably involves the CHl-region of the IgD molecule. 
Three purified radiolabelled myeloma IgM M-components were all shown to be
efficiently bound to many bacteria indicating that a part of the IgM molecule
other than the antigen-combining site can be involved in attachment to bacteria. 
Highly purified detergent-solubilized HLA-A, -B and HLA-D antigens, when
separately incorporated into liposomes, were bound efficiently to two strains of 
N. catarrhalis and to one strain of H. influenzae weakly to one strain of E.
coli, but not at all to another strain E. coli. Preliminary experiments indicate 
that these bacteria-immunoglobulin and bacteria-HLA-antigen interactions lead to 
lymphocyte stimulation.


PMID: 6937974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

