
1. Eur J Haematol. 1995 Nov;55(5):348-56.

Effects of granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor produced in Chinese
hamster ovary cells (regramostim), Escherichia coli (molgramostim) and yeast
(sargramostim) on priming peripheral blood progenitor cells for use with
autologous bone marrow after high-dose chemotherapy.

Hussein AM(1), Ross M, Vredenburgh J, Meisenberg B, Hars V, Gilbert C, Petros WP,
Coniglio D, Kurtzberg J, Rubin P, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Bone Marrow Transplant Program, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

Corrected and republished from
    Eur J Haematol. 1995 May;54(5):281-7.

Peripheral blood progenitor cells (PBPCs) were collected without prior
association with chemotherapy but after the administration of
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) produced in Chinese
hamster ovary cells (CHO-GM, regramostim), Escherichia coli (E. coli-GM,
molgramostim), or yeast (Yeast-GM, sargramostim) and used in conjunction with
autologous bone marrow after high-dose chemotherapy in 69 patients with breast
cancer or melanoma. The mean peripheral white blood cell (WBC) counts increased
by 2.2 to 2.7-fold after regramostim, 4.5 to 7.3-fold after molgramostim and
4.3-fold after sargramostim. All patients underwent three leukaphereses. The mean
(+/- standard error) total nucleated pheresed cells per kg x 10(8) were 4.15 +/- 
0.56, 15.10 +/- 1.77 and 7.24 +/- 1.00 for patients receiving regramostim,
molgramostim or sargramostim respectively. The mean (+/- standard error)
granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming units per kg x 10(4) mobilized into the PB 
were 8.75 +/- 3.63, 71.03 +/- 17.85, and 65.11 +/- 18.74 for patients receiving
regramostim, molgramostim, or sargramostim respectively. The total mean (+/-
standard error) CD34+ cells per kg x 10(7) collected by three leukaphereses were 
3.28 +/- 1.62, 1.34 +/- 0.51 and 2.57 +/- 1.93, for patients receiving
regramostim, molgramostim or sargramostim respectively. The use of either
molgramostim- or sargramostim-primed PBPCs led to complete elimination of
absolute leukopenia with a WBC count under 100/mm3 in 64% and 77% of patients
treated, respectively. Patients receiving molgramostim-primed PBPCs required
fewer red blood cells transfusions than patients receiving regramostim-primed
PBPCs (p = 0.0062). Our data indicate that PBPCs collected without prior
association with chemotherapy but after either molgramostim or sargramostim with 
autologous bone marrow support and GM-CSF shorten the hematopoietic recovery
after myeloablative chemotherapy in patients with breast cancer or melanoma.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.1995.tb00713.x 
PMID: 7493686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

