
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jan;14(1):147-55.

Stable association of pp60src and pp59fyn with the focal adhesion-associated
protein tyrosine kinase, pp125FAK.

Cobb BS(1), Schaller MD, Leu TH, Parsons JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville 22908.

Changes in cellular growth and dramatic alterations in cell morphology and
adhesion are common features of cells transformed by oncogenic protein tyrosine
kinases, such as pp60src and other members of the Src family. In this report, we 
present evidence for the stable association of two Src family kinases (pp60src
and pp59fyn) with tyrosine-phosphorylated forms of a focal adhesion-associated
protein tyrosine kinase, pp125FAK. In Src-transformed chicken embryo cells, most 
of the pp125FAK was stably complexed with activated pp60src (e.g., pp60(527F).
The stable association of pp125FAK with pp60(527F) in vivo required the
structural integrity of the Src SH2 domain. The association of pp60(527F) and
pp125FAK could be reconstituted in vitro by incubation of normal cell extracts
with glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins containing SH2 or SH3/SH2 domains 
of pp60src. Furthermore, the association of isolated SH2 or SH3/SH2 domains with 
in vitro 32P-labeled pp125FAK protected the major site of pp125FAK
autophosphorylation from digestion with a tyrosine phosphatase, indicating that
the autophosphorylation site of pp125FAK participates in binding with Src.
Immunoprecipitation of Src family kinases from extracts of normal chicken embryo 
cells revealed stable complexes of pp59fyn and tyrosine-phosphorylated pp125FAK. 
These data provide evidence for a direct interaction between two cytoplasmic
nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinases and suggest that Src may contribute to
changes in pp125FAK regulation in transformed cells. Furthermore, pp125FAK may
directly participate in the targeting of pp59fyn or possibly other Src family
kinases to focal adhesions in normal cells.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.14.1.147 
PMCID: PMC358365
PMID: 7505391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

