
1. J Leukoc Biol. 1994 Feb;55(2):265-71.

The role of tyrosine kinases and phosphotyrosine-containing recognition motifs in
regulation of the T cell-antigen receptor-mediated signal transduction pathway.

Isakov N(1), Wange RL, Samelson LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and immunology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben
Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.

T cell-mediated immune responses are initiated by interaction of antigen bound to
a glycoprotein encoded by the major histocompatibility complex with the T cell
antigen receptor (TCR). These recognition and binding steps are followed by
multiple intracellular biochemical events. The earliest event detected is an
increase in intracellular protein tyrosine phosphorylation that involves a
complex interaction of tyrosine kinases and phosphatases. Subsequently, one
observes an increase in protein serine/threonine phosphorylation, phospholipid
hydrolysis, and changes in intracellular Ca2+ levels. These and other biochemical
changes lead to cell proliferation, differentiation, and acquisition of effector 
functions. While binding of extracellular growth factors to receptors containing 
cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) domains induces direct activation of
their kinase activity, the multichain TCR lacks an intrinsic kinase domain and
therefore represents a distinct type of receptor. It transduces signals via the
interaction with, and activation of, non-receptor PTKs. Recent efforts directed
at defining the TCR-linked signaling pathways have provided insight into the
regulatory role of three PTKs, and the functional importance of some unique
protein motifs in both TCR subunits and PTKs, which mediate critical
protein-protein interactions in this pathway.

DOI: 10.1002/jlb.55.2.265 
PMID: 7507972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

