
1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Mar 25;269(12):8653-8.

The carboxyl-terminal domain of lipoprotein lipase binds to the low density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor (LRP) and
mediates binding of normal very low density lipoproteins to LRP.

Williams SE(1), Inoue I, Tran H, Fry GL, Pladet MW, Iverius PH, Lalouel JM,
Chappell DA, Strickland DK.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Laboratory, American Red Cross, Rockville, Maryland 20855.

Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) binds with high affinity to the low density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor (LRP) and promotes
binding, uptake, and degradation of normal triglyceride-rich lipoproteins in a
process mediated by LRP (Chappell, D. A., Fry, G. L., Naknitx, M.A., Muhonen, L. 
E., Pladet, M. W., Iverius, P-H., and Strickland, D. K. (1993) J. Biol. Chem.
268, 14168-14175). To localize the portion of LPL that is responsible for
interacting with LRP, fragments of LPL were expressed in bacteria. A fragment of 
human LPL containing the COOH-terminal domain (residues 313-448, designated LPLC)
which lacks the catalytic site was able to bind to LRP. Purified LRP bound
specifically to microtiter wells coated with LPL or LPLC with KD values of 2.8
and 5 nM, respectively. The effects of several mutations of LPLC were tested.
Mutation of Lys407 to Ala reduced the affinity of LPLC for LRP by approximately
10-fold. Like native LPL, LPLC prevented the binding of activated alpha
2-macroglobulin and the 39-kDa receptor-associated protein to LRP and inhibited
the internalization and degradation of activated alpha 2-macroglobulin and
receptor-associated protein in cultured fibroblasts. LPLC also bound to
125I-labeled human normal triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and promoted their
binding to purified LRP and to cultured cells. Mutation of Trp393 and Trp394 to
Ala completely abolished the ability of LPLC to bind to lipoproteins, but had
little effect on its interaction with LRP. These data indicate that the
COOH-terminal domain of LPL may function both in binding lipoproteins and
mediating their interaction with LRP.


PMID: 7510694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

