
1. J Immunol. 1994 Jul 1;153(1):412-20.

Anergy and apoptosis in CD8+ T cells from HIV-infected persons.

Lewis DE(1), Tang DS, Adu-Oppong A, Schober W, Rodgers JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030.

CD8+T cells from HIV-infected persons increase early in infection, display
increased levels of activation Ags, and abnormal MHC-restricted, HIV-specific and
nonspecific cytotoxicity abilities. Paradoxically, these cells are also
unresponsive to T cell signaling in vitro and have decreased in vitro cloning
potential. HIV-specific CTL precursors also are lost late in infection. A
quantitative Southern blotting technique showed that CD8+ T cells from
asymptomatic, HIV-infected persons have increased DNA fragmentation after
overnight incubation. DNA fragmentation was reduced by an endonuclease inhibitor 
but not by cycloheximide, suggesting that a pre-apoptotic state exists in vivo.
Partial inhibition of DNA fragmentation also could be induced by IL-2 addition.
No consistent difference in fragmentation was observed among CD8+ subpopulations 
from HIV-infected individuals, although only CD8+ T cells that did not express
activation Ags (DR-, CD28+, CD57- phenotype) showed reduced fragmentation when
incubated in IL-2. A dramatic increase in CD8+, CD28- cells was observed in
asymptomatic HIV-infected people. A subset of CD8+, CD28- cells in both controls 
and HIV-infected people do not proliferate to T cell signals, and these cells
from controls demonstrate increased DNA fragmentation in vitro after 3 days of
incubation, regardless of stimulation conditions. This suggests that the cells
are end-stage cells. Taken together, the data suggest an increase in anergic or
apoptotic CD8+ T cells in HIV-infected persons. Eventual depletion of
HIV-specific CD8+ T cells may occur through a process of proliferation, anergy
induction, and apoptosis.


PMID: 7515928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

