
1. J Immunol. 1994 Jun 15;152(12):5643-52.

Costimulation through CD28 enhances T cell-dependent B cell activation via
CD40-CD40L interaction.

Klaus SJ(1), Pinchuk LM, Ochs HD, Law CL, Fanslow WC, Armitage RJ, Clark EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

Changes in T cell helper function were analyzed when anti-CD3-activated T cells
were costimulated with mAbs to the CD28 receptor (anti-CD28). T cell-dependent B 
cell growth and differentiation were consistently augmented if anti-CD3
stimulated-T cells were simultaneously activated with anti-CD28. Although
anti-CD28 enhanced IL-2 and IL-4 production, it did not increase B cell responses
solely by augmenting production of soluble lymphokines. Anti-CD28 costimulation
induced increases on T cells of CD40 ligand (CD40L), known to promote B cell
proliferation and Ig secretion. Because anti-CD28 promoted T cell helper
functions and expression of CD40L, we examined the dependence for CD40L during T 
cell-dependent B cell responses. Although soluble CD40 fusion proteins only
partially inhibited T cell-dependent B cell activation, we found a strict
requirement for CD40L expression at initiating B cell responses. Both CD40L
expression and T cell help were blocked by cyclosporin A after TCR cross-linking,
and, unlike T cell proliferation, both remained cyclosporin A sensitive during
CD28 costimulation. In addition, anti-CD28 could not compensate for the T cell
helper deficiency of hyper IgM syndrome patients who lack functional CD40L. Thus,
anti-CD28-induced T cell help is delivered via a CD40L-dependent process. The
fact that cross-linking CD40 on B cells promotes expression of the B7/BB-1 ligand
for CD28 suggest T and B interactions may have a reciprocal amplification
mechanism.


PMID: 7515910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

