
1. Eur J Immunol. 1994 Jan;24(1):265-72.

T cell receptor stimulation, but not CD28 costimulation, is dependent on
LFA-1-mediated events.

Green JM(1), Zheng XG, Shimizu Y, Thompson CB, Turka LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Microbiology, University of Michigan
Medical Center, Ann Arbor 48109.

Accessory molecules play a crucial role in the development of the T cell response
to antigenic challenge. In this manuscript we specifically examine the role of
two accessory molecules, CD28 and LFA-1, in modulating the T cell proliferative
response to a variety of stimuli. We demonstrate that the proliferation induced
by staphylococcal enterotoxins A and B in combination with CD28 costimulation is 
dependent on LFA-1-mediated events. This requirement for LFA-1 is independent of 
T cell-accessory cell adhesion. Similarly, an allogeneic mixed lymphocyte
reaction, which has previously been shown to be a CD28-dependent response, can be
inhibited by blockade of LFA-1. This suggests LFA-1 plays an essential role in
these responses, either by enhancing intercellular adhesion or by an independent 
signal transduction event. In contrast, when the primary activating stimulus is
delivered by immobilized anti-CD3 antibody or by PMA, and the secondary stimulus 
by either alpha-CD28 or cell-bound CD28 ligand B7, there is no requirement for
LFA-1. In addition, we demonstrate that cross-linking of LFA-1 with immobilized
monoclonal antibody, or engagement of LFA-1 with ICAM-1 expressed on the surface 
of a CHO cell, provide an insufficient costimulus for T cell proliferation
initiated by enterotoxin, immobilized alpha-CD3 or phorbol ester. Our data
suggests that LFA-1, in contrast to CD28, functions not as a costimulatory
molecule, but serves primarily to modulate the signal delivered through the T
cell receptor.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830240141 
PMID: 7517362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

