
1. Mol Immunol. 1994 Jul;31(10):761-9.

Evidence showing that the 1105 and 1106 isotypic residues of the fourth component
of human complement, C4A, are not involved in amide bond formation.

Reilly BD(1), Skanes VM, Levine RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of New Mexico, School of Medicine,
Albuquerque 87131.

Human C4A and C4B have different functions that may stem from their ability to
bind hydroxyl or free amino groups on complement activating surfaces. Previous
studies suggest that C4B binds to hydroxyl or amino groups whereas C4A binds to
free amino groups on acceptor molecules. Comparison of the derived amino acid
sequences of C4A and C4B has shown that differences exist between them at
positions 1101, 1102, 1105 and 1106. These residues appear to be involved in the 
binding specificity of C4B. Less is known about the corresponding residues of
C4A. It has been suggested that the aspartic acid of C4A at position 1106 is
involved in amide bond formation by serving as a catalytic residue for the
reaction or by promoting an increased interaction with amino nucleophilic groups.
To examine the functional role of residues 1101-1106, we studied the effects of
the C4A site-specific antipeptide mAb, AII-1 in assays dependent on the covalent 
binding properties of C4A; the C4 mediated inhibition of hemolysis and the C4
mediated inhibition of immune precipitation. This study shows that mAb AII-1 has 
no effect on C4-mediated hemolysis or its ability to inhibit the rate of immune
precipitate formation. The lack of interference by AII-1 in these assays could
not be explained by low affinity interaction between antibody and C4A showing
that mAb AII-1 does not affect the covalent binding activity of C4A. Furthermore,
results from epitope mapping studies show that AII-1 binds to Leu1105 and Asp1106
suggesting that these residues are not critical for amide bond formation by C4A.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(94)90150-3 
PMID: 7518568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

