
1. J Immunol. 1994 Nov 15;153(10):4468-77.

Invariant-cognate peptide exchange restores class II dimer stability in HLA-DM
mutants.

Monji T(1), McCormack AL, Yates JR 3rd, Pious D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

Class II presentation mutants have mutations in the HLA-DMA or B genes and are
defective in the presentation of whole exogenous Ags restricted by HLA-DR, -DQ,
and -DP. The functional defect in Ag presentation is accompanied by an altered
conformation of cell surface class II molecules and instability of extracted
class II dimers in SDS-PAGE; the latter can be corrected by incubation of mutant 
cells in an acidic pH in the presence of cognate peptide. Here we investigated
the basis for correction of class II dimer instability by acid/cognate peptide
treatment and the extent to which this treatment corrects the class II
conformational defect in DMB mutants. We found that an acidic pH generates
peptide binding sites in class II molecules of DMB mutants by eluting invariant
chain (li)-derived peptides from them. Cognate peptides can then bind to the
empty binding sites of class II molecules in a pH-independent manner, which
results in stabilization of class II dimers. Acid/peptide treatment also restores
the DR polymorphic epitope recognized by mAb 7.3.19.1 but not the DR polymorphic 
epitope recognized by mAb 16.23; low pH gradually destroys the 16.23 epitope in
nonmutant cells. Mutant 10.24.6, which has a mutation in the DRA coding region
creating an extra glycosylation site, also has unstable DR dimers whose stability
is restored by acid/peptide treatment. These results suggest that the primary
phenotypic defect in both the DMB and 10.24.6 mutants is the abundance of li
peptides and lack of cognate peptides bound to class II molecules.


PMID: 7525705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

