
1. Blood. 1994 Dec 15;84(12):4099-106.

Synergistic actions of stem cell factor and other burst-promoting activities on
proliferation of CD34+ highly purified blood progenitors expressing HLA-DR or
different levels of c-kit protein.

Sonoda Y(1), Sakabe H, Ohmisono Y, Tanimukai S, Yokota S, Nakagawa S, Clark SC,
Abe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Japan.

We studied the synergistic effects of stem cell factor (SCF) and other
burst-promoting activities (BPAs) such as interleukin-3 (IL-3),
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), or IL-9 on
proliferation of human peripheral blood-derived highly purified progenitors. SCF,
IL-3, GM-CSF, and IL-9 showed significant BPA when CD34+HLA-DR+ cells were used
as the target population. IL-3 exerted the most potent BPA, and GM-CSF supported 
approximately 40% to 70% of the erythroid burst-forming units that are responsive
to IL-3. SCF and IL-9 showed much weaker BPA than that of IL-3 or GM-CSF.
Combinations of IL-3 with other BPAs did not show synergistic actions supporting 
erythroid-burst formation. However, GM-CSF showed a significant additive effect
with IL-9 or SCF. When CD34+c-kithigh cells were used as the target, SCF showed a
much stronger BPA. Also, a distinct additive effect between SCF and IL-3 or
GM-CSF on erythrocyte-containing mixed colony formation was observed. On the
other hand, when CD34+c-kitlow cells were used as the target, SCF, IL-3, and
GM-CSF could express BPA. In contrast, IL-9 alone failed to support
erythroid-burst formation. Because CD34+c-kithigh cells weakly expressed CD34
antigen, these cells appeared to be more mature progenitors than CD34+c-kitlow
cells. These results suggest that IL-9 acts on more mature progenitors than those
of SCF, IL-3, or GM-CSF and that the primary target of SCF is multipotential
progenitors at the very early stage of development.


PMID: 7527665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

