
1. J Exp Med. 1995 Mar 1;181(3):1133-44.

The Bw4 public epitope of HLA-B molecules confers reactivity with natural killer 
cell clones that express NKB1, a putative HLA receptor.

Gumperz JE(1), Litwin V, Phillips JH, Lanier LL, Parham P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford University, California
94305.

Although inhibition of natural killer (NK) cell-mediated lysis by the class I HLA
molecules of target cells is an established phenomenon, knowledge of the features
of class I molecules which induce this effect remains rudimentary. Using class I 
alleles HLA-B*1502 and B*1513 which differ only at residues 77-83 which define
the Bw4 and Bw6 serological epitopes, we tested the hypothesis that the presence 
of the Bw4 epitope on class I molecules determines recognition by NKB1+ NK cells.
HLA-B*1513 possesses the Bw4 epitope, whereas B*1502 has the Bw6 epitope. Lysis
by NKB1+ NK cell clones of transfected target cells expressing B*1513 as the only
HLA-A, -B, or -C molecule was inhibited, whereas killing of transfectants
expressing B*1502 was not. Addition of an an anti-NKB1 monoclonal antibody
reconstituted lysis of the targets expressing B*1513, but did not affect killing 
of targets bearing B*1502. The inhibitory effect of B*1513 could be similarly
prevented by the addition of an anti-class I monoclonal antibody. These results
show that the presence of the Bw4 epitope influences recognition of HLA-B
molecules by NK cells that express NKB1, and suggest that the NKB1 molecule may
act as a receptor for Bw4+ HLA-B alleles. Sequences outside of the Bw4 region
must also affect recognition by NKB1+ NK cells, because lysis of transfectants
expressing HLA-A*2403 or A*2501, which possess the Bw4 epitope but are in other
ways substantially different from HLA-B molecules, was not increased by addition 
of the anti-NKB1 antibody. Asparagine 86, the single site of N-linked
glycosylation on class I molecules, is in close proximity to the Bw4/Bw6 region. 
The glycosylation site of the Bw4-positive molecule B*5801 was mutated, and the
mutant molecules tested for inhibition of NKB1+ NK cells. Inhibition that could
be reversed by addition of the anti-NKB1 monoclonal antibody was observed,
showing the presence of the carbohydrate moiety is not essential for class I
recognition by NKB1+ NK cell clones.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.181.3.1133 
PMCID: PMC2191933
PMID: 7532677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

