
1. Eur J Immunol. 1995 Feb;25(2):596-603.

Studies on the interdependence of gp39 and B7 expression and function during
antigen-specific immune responses.

Roy M(1), Aruffo A, Ledbetter J, Linsley P, Kehry M, Noelle R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, NH 03756.

Interactions between T and B cells are dynamic and regulated by interacting
receptor: co-receptors. Interactions between CD40 and its ligand, gp39, and the
CD28/CTLA-4 and B7 family members play a decisive role in regulating the
progression of cognate interactions. The interdependence of gp39-CD40 and
CD28/CTLA-B7 expression and function was studied in vitro during an
antigen-induced immune response using T cells from mice expressing a transgenic T
cell receptor (TCR). gp39 was induced on pigeon cytochrome c (PCC)-transgenic T
cells in the presence of antigen and antigen-presenting cells. The
antigen-induced expression of gp39 on transgenic T cells was inhibited by
antibodies to class II major histocompatibility complex, CD4 and LFA-1, but not
by CTLA-4 Ig, anti-B7-1 or anti-B7-2. These data established that the
antigen-induced expression of gp39 was not dependent on co-stimulation via
CD28/CTLA-4. The addition of PCC also resulted in the modest expression of B7-1
and a more robust expression of B7-2 on the cognate B cells. The addition of
anti-gp39 blocked the up-regulated expression of B7-1 and partially blocked the
up-regulated expression of B7-2. The addition of anti-gp39 and anti-interleukin-4
inhibited antigen-induced expression of B7-2 on B cells to near background
levels. Studies on the up-regulation of B7-1 and B7-2 on resting B cells showed
that soluble gp39 up-regulated B7-1 and B7-2 expression on B cells. In addition, 
interleukin-4 and interferon-gamma up-regulated B7-2 expression on B cells. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that the antigen-induced expression of gp39 is
dependent on TCR-derived signals, yet independent of CD28/CTLA-4 co-stimulatory
signals. Cognate interactions also resulted in the modest enhancement of B7-1
expression and a more profound expression of B7-2 which were completely or
partially dependent on gp39-CD40 interactions.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830250243 
PMID: 7533092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

