
1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 17;270(11):5979-84.

Differential regulation of alpha 4 integrin-dependent binding to domains 1 and 4 
of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1.

Kilger G(1), Needham LA, Nielsen PJ, Clements J, Vestweber D, Holzmann B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Technical University, Munich, 
Federal Republic of Germany.

The vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) plays an important role in diverse
physiological and pathological processes. The homologous first and fourth
immunoglobulin-like domains of the seven domain form of VCAM-1 present binding
motifs for alpha 4 beta 1 integrin. Using a panel of VCAM-1 domain deletion
mutants we show that alpha 4 beta 7 integrin interacts with both domains 1 and 4.
In contrast to their identical domain usage, alpha 4 beta 1 and alpha 4 beta 7
integrins differ in the activation states required for binding to domains 1 and 4
of VCAM-1. We show that integrin alpha 4 beta 1 required significantly higher
concentrations of Mn2+ than integrin alpha 4 beta 7 to support half-maximal
adhesion to domain 4. Moreover, a clear difference in the capacity of integrins
alpha 4 beta 1 and alpha 4 beta 7 to interact with domain 4 was detected in the
presence of Ca2+ and Mg2+ cations. Adhesion to domain 1 of VCAM-1, however, was
not affected by integrin heterodimer composition. Instead, the activity level of 
integrin alpha 4 beta 1 for domain 1 binding was regulated by CD24 expression.
Binding to seven domain VCAM-1 was not altered significantly by beta 1 and beta 7
subunits or CD24. These data indicate that integrin heterodimer composition and
CD24 expression differentially modulate integrin binding to domains 1 and 4 of
VCAM-1. Mechanisms that alter integrin binding specificity or monovalent versus
divalent interactions may affect the strength of adhesion as well as signal
transmission in adherent cells and may therefore be critical to controlling the
cellular response to integrin occupancy.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.11.5979 
PMID: 7534304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

