
1. J Immunol. 1995 Jul 1;155(1):348-56.

Identification of complement regulatory domains in human factor H.

Gordon DL(1), Kaufman RM, Blackmore TK, Kwong J, Lublin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Flinders Medical Centre,
Australia.

Factor H, a regulator of complement activation, contains 20 short consensus
repeat (SCR) domains common among the family of C3b/C4b-binding proteins. Chinese
hamster ovary cells transfected with cDNA corresponding to the N-terminal tryptic
fragment of factor H (containing SCR 1-5 and part of SCR 6) secreted protein with
cofactor activity for factor I-dependent cleavage of C3b. A series of deletion
mutants, each lacking one of the first five SCR, were constructed, and the
supernatants of transfected Chinese hamster ovary cells were tested for cofactor 
activity. Supernatants of Chinese hamster ovary cells transfected with SCR 1, SCR
4, and SCR 5 deletion mutants retained cofactor function, although the SCR 1
deletion had reduced cofactor activity. Deletion of SCR 2 or 3 totally abolished 
cofactor activity. Expression and functional analysis of SCR units 1-3, 2-3, and 
2-4 demonstrated that the SCR 1-3 unit is sufficient for cofactor activity, but
SCR 1-4 is required for full activity. For assays involving cell protection, a
construct linking SCR 1-5 to the glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchor of
decay-accelerating factor was prepared, and stable transfectants were obtained.
These cells were protected against complement-mediated cytotoxicity, similarly to
decay-accelerating factor- and membrane cofactor protein-transfected cells. These
studies define the complement regulatory domains in factor H and suggest that the
general complement functional unit for C3 convertase regulation involves three or
four consecutive SCR units.


PMID: 7541419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

