
1. J Immunol. 1995 Jul 15;155(2):556-67.

Cellular interaction in germinal centers. Roles of CD40 ligand and B7-2 in
established germinal centers.

Han S(1), Hathcock K, Zheng B, Kepler TB, Hodes R, Kelsoe G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore 21201, USA.

Costimulatory interactions between T and B lymphocytes are crucial for T cell
activation and B cell proliferation and differentiation. We have compared the
roles of CD40L and B7-2 in the initiation and maturation of humoral immunity by
administering anti-CD40 ligand (L) or anti-B7-2 Ab during the early (days -1 to
3) or late (days 6-10) phases of primary responses to thymus-dependent (Td) and
-independent (Ti) Ags. Germinal center (GC) formation in response to a Td Ag was 
inhibited completely by the early administration of anti-CD40L or anti-B7-2 Abs. 
Later in the response, established GCs remained sensitive to anti-CD40L but were 
resistant to treatment with anti-B7-2. However, Ig hypermutation was reduced
dramatically in GCs of anti-B7-2-treated mice and humoral memory was impaired.
Early administration of anti-CD40L reduced serum Ab levels to approximately 10%
of controls, whereas early treatment with anti-B7-2 reduced Ab production by only
50%. Later treatments with either Ab had no effect on Ab production. Response to 
a type II Ti Ag was more resistant than Td responses to interruption of
costimulatory interactions. Our findings suggest that the costimulatory roles of 
CD40:CD40L and B7-2:CD28/CTLA-4 differ in the GC; administration of anti-CD40L
abrogates an established GC reaction, whereas Ab to B7-2 suppresses Ig
hypermutation and entry into the B cell memory compartment. Once B cells have
entered the differentiation pathway to Ab production, neither CD40L nor B7-2 is
necessary for their continued differentiation and persistence.


PMID: 7541819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

