
1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 22;270(38):22632-8.

Association of 75/80-kDa phosphoproteins and the tyrosine kinases Lyn, Fyn, and
Lck with the B cell molecule CD20. Evidence against involvement of the
cytoplasmic regions of CD20.

Deans JP(1), Kalt L, Ledbetter JA, Schieven GL, Bolen JB, Johnson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.

CD20, a non-glycosylated cell-surface protein expressed exclusively on B
lymphocytes, is one of a family of 4-pass transmembrane molecules that also
includes the beta chain of the high affinity receptor for IgE. The precise
function of CD20 is unknown, although in vitro effects of CD20-specific
antibodies on resting B cells indicate that it is able to transduce an
extracellular signal affecting the G0/G1 cell cycle transition. Previous studies 
have demonstrated that CD20-initiated intracellular signals involve tyrosine
kinase activation and that CD20 is tightly associated with both serine and
tyrosine kinases. Here, analysis of CD20-associated molecules has revealed that
CD20 is associated with the Src family tyrosine kinases p56/53lyn, p56lck, and
p59fyn and with 75/80-kDa proteins phosphorylated in vivo on tyrosine residues.
Mutagenesis of CD20 was performed to define regions of CD20 involved in
intermolecular interactions. Mutants were analyzed in the human T lymphoblastoid 
cell line Molt-4, in which ectopically expressed wild-type CD20 associated with
p59fyn, p56lck, and 75/80-kDa phosphoproteins. Deletion of major portions of the 
cytoplasmic regions of CD20 did not abolish its association with either p75/80 or
tyrosine kinases. The interaction between CD20 and the Src-related kinases is
therefore likely to be independent of CD20 cytoplasmic domains and may occur
indirectly. The interaction may be mediated by the p75/80 phosphoproteins, which 
were found to be tightly associated with the Src family kinases isolated from the
CD20 complex.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.38.22632 
PMID: 7545683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

