
1. Environ Health Perspect. 1995 May;103 Suppl 4:67-72.

Decreased lymphocyte responses in free-ranging bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops
truncatus) are associated with increased concentrations of PCBs and DDT in
peripheral blood.

Lahvis GP(1), Wells RS, Kuehl DW, Stewart JL, Rhinehart HL, Via CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore 21201, USA.

Since 1987, large-scale mortalities of dolphins have been reported along the
Atlantic coast of North America, in the Gulf of Mexico, and in the Mediterranean 
Sea. Autopsied bottlenose dolphins, Tursiops truncatus, which were collected from
the large-scale mortality along the Atlantic coast in 1987 to 1988, exhibited
opportunistic infections indicative of immune dysfunction. Further, these animals
had high levels of chlorinated hydrocarbons, such as PCBs and DDT, that can
suppress immune functions. The purpose of this study was to determine whether
there is a relationship between chemical contaminant exposure and immune response
in free-ranging dolphins. In June of 1991, peripheral blood was obtained from
members of a bottlenose dolphin population that resides along the west coast of
Florida. Peripheral blood lymphocyte responses to Concanavalin A (Con A) and
phytohemagglutinin (PHA) were determined in vitro and compared by regression
analysis with contaminant concentrations in whole blood from a small subset of
these animals (n = 5). These data indicate that a reduced immune response in
these bottlenose dolphins was correlated with increasing whole blood
concentrations of several contaminants. Specifically, inverse correlations were
found between Con A-induced lymphocyte proliferation and tetrachlorinated to
octachlorinated biphenyls (r2 values ranged from 0.70 to 0.87). Con A-induced
lymphocyte responses also correlated inversely with p,p'DDT (r2 values of 0.73
and 0.79); o.p'-DDE (r2 values of 0.93 and 0.96); and p,p'-DDE (r2 values of 0.73
and 0.81).

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.95103s467 
PMCID: PMC1519269
PMID: 7556026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

