
1. J Immunol. 1995 Oct 1;155(7):3360-7.

Potential role of 4-1BB in T cell activation. Comparison with the costimulatory
molecule CD28.

Hurtado JC(1), Kim SH, Pollok KE, Lee ZH, Kwon BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis 46202, USA.

The expression of the murine T cell Ag 4-1BB, a member of the TNF-R family, is
induced by T cell activation. Previously, we and others had shown that signaling 
through 4-1BB enhanced proliferative T cell responses. To investigate a potential
role for the interaction of 4-1BB with its ligand (4-1BBL) in T cell activation, 
we studied the ability of a soluble chimera of 4-1BB (4-1BBFc) to interfere with 
proliferative responses and cytokine production in models of activation dependent
in intercellular interactions. The potential blocking effect of 4-1BBFc was
compared with that of the chimeric molecule CTLA-4Ig, a reagent known to
interfere with the interaction of CD28 (and/or CTLA-4) with B7 costimulatory
receptors. In this study, we report that 4-1BBFc partially blocked both the
activation of unfractionated splenocytes triggered by soluble anti-CD3
(anti-CD3s), and the more physiologically relevant responses to alloantigen. In
addition, we show that both chimeric molecules partially blocked proliferative
responses and IL-2 secretion by highly purified resting T cells activated with
anti-CD3s in the presence of fixed accessory cells that express B7 receptors and 
4-1BBL. Furthermore, in this model system, the blocking capacity of 4-1BBFc and
CTLA-4Ig appears to correlate with the relative expression of their respective
cognate receptors (4-1BBL and B7) on the accessory cell. Simultaneous addition of
both blocking reagents produced an additive effect in the model systems studied.


PMID: 7561030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

