
1. Mol Biol Cell. 1995 Aug;6(8):953-66.

Transformation and pp60v-src autophosphorylation correlate with SHC-GRB2 complex 
formation in rat and chicken cells expressing host-range and kinase-active,
transformation-defective alleles of v-src.

Verderame MF(1), Guan JL, Woods Ignatoski KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey 17033, USA.

The biochemical properties of several pp60v-src substrates believed to
participate in src-mediated transformation were examined in cells expressing a
kinase-active, transformation-defective v-src allele (v-src-F172 delta/Y416F) and
its parental allele, v-src-F172 delta, a host-range--dependent allele that
transforms chicken cells to a fusiform morphology, but does not transform rat
cells. Because pp60v-src-F172 delta is dependent on autophosphorylation for
transforming ability, these alleles provide a unique opportunity to examine the
role of pp60v-src autophosphorylation in regulating substrate interactions.
Increased pp125FAK tyrosine phosphorylation and high levels of
pp60v-src-associated phosphotidylinositol-3' kinase activity were detected
specifically in chicken cells exhibiting round, refractile transformation but not
in cells transformed to a fusiform morphology. Increased pp125FAK kinase
activity, but not increased pp125FAK tyrosine-phosphorylation correlated with
pp60v-src autophosphorylation and increased anchorage-independent growth. Thus,
pp125FAK and PI3'K may participate in morphological transformation by v-src.
Furthermore, association of phosphorylated SHC with the adapter GRB2 correlated
with increased anchorage-independent growth (and autophosphorylation) in both rat
and chicken cells independent of the morphological phenotype induced. Therefore, 
host-range dependence for transformation may be regulated through association of 
SHC with GRB2, thus implicating SHC as a crucial substrate for src-dependent
transformation.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.6.8.953 
PMCID: PMC301255
PMID: 7579711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

