
1. Genes Dev. 1995 Nov 1;9(21):2635-45.

Developmental-specific activity of the FGF-4 enhancer requires the synergistic
action of Sox2 and Oct-3.

Yuan H(1), Corbi N, Basilico C, Dailey L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York
10016, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF-4) has been shown to be a signaling molecule
whose expression is essential for postimplantation mouse development and, at
later embryonic stages, for limb patterning and growth. The FGF-4 gene is
expressed in the blastocyst inner cell mass and later in distinct embryonic
tissues but is transcriptionally silent in the adult. In tissue culture FGF-4
expression is restricted to undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells and
embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell lines. Previously, we determined that EC
cell-specific transcriptional activation of the FGF-4 gene depends on a
synergistic interaction between octamer-binding proteins and an EC-specific
factor, Fx, that bind adjacent sites on the FGF-4 enhancer. Through the cloning
and characterization of an F9 cell cDNA we now show that the latter activity is
Sox2, a member of the Sry-related Sox factors family. Sox2 can form a ternary
complex with either the ubiquitous Oct-1 or the embryonic-specific Oct-3 protein 
on FGF-4 enhancer DNA sequences. However, only the Sox2/Oct-3 complex is able to 
promote transcriptional activation. These findings identify FGF-4 as the first
known embryonic target gene for Oct-3 and for any of the Sox factors, and offer
insights into the mechanisms of selective gene activation by Sox and
octamer-binding proteins during embryogenesis.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.9.21.2635 
PMID: 7590241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

