
1. J Immunol. 1995 Nov 1;155(9):4313-21.

Purified X2 binding protein (X2BP) cooperatively binds the class II MHC X box
region in the presence of purified RFX, the X box factor deficient in the bare
lymphocyte syndrome.

Moreno CS(1), Emery P, West JE, Durand B, Reith W, Mach B, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

The conserved X2 box sequence of MHC class II promoters is homologous to TRE/CRE 
elements, and is required for B cell expression and IFN-gamma induction of MHC
class II genes. The X2 binding protein (X2BP) was initially identified as a
DNA-binding activity that specifically interacts with the conserved X2 box
sequence in both the MHC HLA-DRA and HLA-DRB promoters. To begin to demonstrate
that X2BP is the X2 box factor responsible for class II expression in B cells, we
have purified X2BP to homogeneity from B cell nuclear extracts using DNA-affinity
chromatography. X-box DNA-affinity purification indicates that X2BP is most
likely composed of two polypeptides of 120 kDa and 46 kDa. The 120-kDa protein
was specifically cross-linked to an X-box probe by exposure to UV irradiation.
The 46-kDa subunit of X2BP cross-reacted with anti-rat CREB polyclonal Abs but
not to anti-human CREB Abs in Western analysis and supershift assays, indicating 
that it may be a novel member of the ATF/CREB family. Purified X2BP interacted
with purified RFX, a factor that binds to the adjacent X1 box and is absent in
some cell lines that are mutant for MHC class II transcription. This interaction 
increases the DNA-binding half-life of RFX from 5 to at least 60 min, suggesting 
that X2BP functions in class II MHC gene expression by forming a stable complex
with RFX.


PMID: 7594590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

