
1. J Immunol. 1995 Nov 1;155(9):4231-5.

Administration of recombinant human IL-1 by Staphylococcus enterotoxin B prevents
tolerance induction in vivo.

Nakata Y(1), Matsuda K, Uzawa A, Nomura M, Akashi M, Suzuki G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Research and Radiation Health, National Institute of
Radiologic Sciences, Chiba, Japan.

Peripheral tolerance is important to prevent autoimmunity of T cells against
tissue-specific autoantigens in peripheral organs. In certain pathologic
situations, peripheral tolerance breaks for unknown reasons and autoimmune
diseases occur. Anergy is one of the mechanisms of peripheral tolerance that
down-modulates IL-2 synthesis and IL-4 responsiveness by helper T cell clones. In
this report, we utilized a model system in which V beta 8+ CD4 T cells were
anergized by administration of high doses of Staphylococcus enterotoxin B (SEB)
in vivo and investigated an effect of recombinant human (rh) IL-1 on the
tolerance induction. RhIL-1 was used because of its ability to induce IL-4
responsiveness in T cells. When rhIL-1 was administered within 24 h after SEB
inoculation, the cytokine interfered with tolerance induction; V beta 8+CD4 T
cells from mice that had been treated with both SEB and IL-1 proliferated in
response to SEB and produced IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-gamma upon TCR/CD28
cross-linking. Delayed administration of rhIL-1 by 48 h failed to do this; T
cells did not proliferate in response to SEB, but they retained an ability to
produce IL-4 upon TCR/CD28 cross-linking. Administration of rhIL-1 induced better
proliferation of V beta 8+CD4 T cells in response to SEB in vivo but did not
prevent cell death after proliferation. These results suggest a potential role of
inflammatory cytokine IL-1 in the course of autoimmunity via interference with
tolerance.


PMID: 7594579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

