
1. J Exp Med. 1995 Nov 1;182(5):1505-15.

Interleukin (IL) 4, in the absence of antigen stimulation, induces an anergy-like
state in differentiated CD8+ TC1 cells: loss of IL-2 synthesis and autonomous
proliferation but retention of cytotoxicity and synthesis of other cytokines.

Sad S(1), Mosmann TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada.

Naive T cells in the periphery mainly secrete interleukin (IL) 2 upon activation.
After stimulation in the presence of appropriate costimulators, both CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells differentiate into effector cells secreting distinct T helper (Th)
1- and Th2-like cytokine patterns. Subsequent to differentiation, both CD4+ (Th1 
and Th2) and CD8+ (TC1 and TC2) cells are stable and cannot be induced to
differentiate into the opposite pattern or revert to the naive cytokine secretion
pattern. We now show that IL-4 caused committed TC1 bulk populations or clones to
lose the ability to synthesize IL-2. The cells retained the ability to secrete
interferon (IFN) gamma, granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and
tumor necrosis factor, did not synthesize any Th2 cytokines, and did not alter
cell surface marker expression. IL-4 rapidly inhibited IL-2-synthesizing ability 
in the absence or presence of antigen-presenting cells, thus demonstrating that
IL-4 acted directly on TC1 cells. The defect in IL-2 synthesis could not be
reversed by subsequent stimulation with potent antigen-presenting cells in the
presence of IL-2 and anti-IL-4, or with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 antibodies. Both 
IL-2+ and IL-2- TC1 cells were strongly cytotoxic toward allogeneic but not
syngeneic targets. However, IL-2- TC1 cells were unable to proliferate unless
exogenous IL-2 was provided. TC1 cells that lose IL-2 synthesis but retain
IFN-gamma synthesis and cytotoxicity may be similar to the "anergic" cells
induced by stimulation of CD4+ or CD8+ cells in the absence of costimulators.
These results suggest that during a mixed type 1/type 2 response in vivo, IL-4
may induce the IL-2+ TC1-->IL-2-TC1 conversion, and thus curtail the expansion of
the TC1 response without impairing short-term effector function.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.182.5.1505 
PMCID: PMC2192195
PMID: 7595220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

