
1. J Immunol. 1995 Jul 1;155(1):83-92.

Induction of responsiveness in superantigen-induced anergic T cells. Role of
ligand density and costimulatory signals.

Heeg K(1), Wagner H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Technical University of Munich,
Germany.

The bacterial superantigen staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) induces in vivo a
state of anergy defined by the inability of V beta 8+ CD4+ T cells to produce
IL-2 upon restimulation in vitro. However, restimulation in vivo triggers a burst
of acutely released lymphokines including IL-2 and TNF, paralleled by
up-regulation of lymphokine-specific mRNA. Since anergy as defined in vitro
appears not to operate in vivo, we analyzed parameters able to induce
responsiveness in anergic T cells. We show here that in vitro stimulation of
anergic T cells with competent Ag-presenting cells induces responsiveness,
provided the APC (activated B cells or dendritic cells) present high
concentrations of SEB. Crosslinking of CD28 molecules on anergic T cells could
substitute the requirement for competent APC. Quantitation of TCR threshold by
determining the SEB concentrations able to trigger half-maximal T cell responses 
revealed that anergic and normal T cells exhibited the same TCR threshold for the
expression of functional IL-2 receptors (IL-2R), yet the TCR threshold for
induction of IL-2 production was 10- to 100-fold elevated in anergic T cells. TCR
threshold for normal and anergic T cells was further dependent on the type of
APC, i.e., costimulus-competent APC required 100-fold less SEB. The results
indicate that extrinsic factors such as ligand concentration and costimulus
competence of APC can overcome the heightened TCR threshold of anergic T cells,
thus reverting anergy into responsiveness.


PMID: 7602125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

