
1. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Jun 1;230(2):525-32.

Transketolase A of Escherichia coli K12. Purification and properties of the
enzyme from recombinant strains.

Sprenger GA(1), Schörken U, Sprenger G, Sahm H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biotechnologie 1, Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Germany.

Transketolase A was purified to apparent homogeneity from recombinant Escherichia
coli K12 cells carrying the homologous cloned tktA gene on a pUC19-derived
plasmid. These recombinant cells exhibited a transketolase activity in crude
extracts of up to 9.7 U/mg compared to < or = 0.1 U/mg in wild-type cells.
Transketolase A was purified from crude extracts of a recombinant strain by
successive ammonium sulfate precipitations and two anion-exchange chromatography 
steps (Q-Sepharose FF, Fractogel EMD-DEAE column) and afforded an apparently
homogeneous protein band on SDS/PAGE. The enzyme, both in its active and apoform,
had a molecular mass of 145,000 Da (+/- 10,000 Da), judged by gel-filtration
chromatography. Subunits of 73,000 Da (+/- 2000 Da) were determined on SDS/PAGE, 
thus, transketolase A most likely forms a homodimer. N-terminal amino acid
sequencing of the protein verified the identity with the cloned gene tktA. The
specific activity of the purified enzyme, determined at 30 degrees C with the
substrates xylulose 5-phosphate (donor of C2 compound) and ribose 5-phosphate
(acceptor) at an optimal pH (50 mM glycylglycine, pH 8.5), was 50.4 U/mg. Km
values for the substrates xylulose 5-phosphate and ribose 5-phosphate were 160
microM and 1.4 mM, respectively. Km values for the other physiological substrates
of transketolase A were 90 microM for erythrose 4-phosphate (best acceptor
substrate), 2.1 mM for D,L-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, 1.1 mM for fructose
6-phosphate, and 4 mM for sedoheptulose 7-phosphate. Hydroxypyruvate served as
alternative donor (Km = 18 mM). Unphosphorylated acceptor compounds were
formaldehyde (Km = 31 mM), glycolaldehyde (14 mM), D,L-glyceraldehyde (10 mM) and
D-erythrose (150 mM). The enzyme was competitively inhibited by D-arabinose
5-phosphate (K = 6 mM at a concentration of 2.5 mM D-arabinose 5-phosphate) or by
the chelating agent EDTA. The inactive apoform of transketolase A was yielded by 
dialysis against buffer containing 10 mM EDTA, thus removing the cofactors
thiamine diphosphate and divalent cations. The reconstitution of the apoenzyme
proceded faster in the presence of manganese ions (Kd = 7 microM at 10 microM
thiamine diphosphate) than with other divalent cations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1995.0525h.x 
PMID: 7607225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

