
1. Eur J Immunol. 1995 Jun;25(6):1580-8.

Co-expression of CD8 alpha in CD4+ T cell receptor alpha beta + T cells migrating
into the murine small intestine epithelial layer.

Reimann J(1), Rudolphi A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ulm, Germany.

We investigated the surface phenotype of CD3+CD4+ T cell receptor (TCR) alpha
beta + T cells repopulating the intestinal lymphoid tissues of C.B-17 scid/scid
(severe-combined immunodeficient; scid) (H-2d, Ld+) mice. CD4+ CD8- T cells were 
cell sorter-purified from various secondary and tertiary lymphoid organs of
congenic C.B-17 +/+ (H-2d, Ld+) or semi-syngeneic dm2 (H-2d, Ld-) immunocompetent
donor mice. After transfer of 10(5) cells into young scid mice, a mucosa-homing, 
memory CD44hi CD45RBlo CD4+ T cell population was selectively engrafted. Large
numbers of single-positive (SP) CD3+ CD2+ CD28+ CD4+ CD8- T cells that expressed 
the alpha 4 integrin chain CD49d were found in the spleen, the mesenteric lymph
nodes, the peritoneal cavity and the gut lamina propria of transplanted scid
mice. Unexpectedly, large populations of donor-type double-positive (DP) CD4+ CD8
alpha + CD8 beta - T cells with high expression of the CD3/TCR complex appeared
in the epithelial layer of the small intestine of transplanted scid mice. In
contrast to SP CD4+ T cells, the intraepithelial DP T cells showed low expression
of the CD2 and the CD28 co-stimulator molecules, and of the alpha 4 integrin
chain CD49d, but expressed high levels of the alpha IEL integrin chain CD103. The
TCR-V beta repertoire of DP but not SP intraepithelial CD4+ T cells was biased
towards usage of the V beta 6 and V beta 8 viable domains. Highly purified
populations of SP and DP CD4+ T cell populations from the small intestine
epithelial layer of transplanted scid mice had different abilities to repopulate 
secondary scid recipient mice: SP CD4+ T cells repopulated various lymphoid
tissues of the immunodeficient host, while intraepithelial DP CD4+ T cells did
not. Hence, a subset of CD3+ CD4+ TCR alpha beta + T cells apparently undergoes
striking phenotypic changes when it enters the microenvironment of the small
intestine epithelial layer.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830250617 
PMID: 7614985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

