
1. Clin Sci (Lond). 1995 May;88(5):587-94.

Plasminogen activator and plasminogen activator inhibitor I release during
experimental endotoxaemia in chimpanzees: effect of interventions in the cytokine
and coagulation cascades.

Biemond BJ(1), Levi M, Ten Cate H, Van der Poll T, BÃ¼ller HR, Hack CE, Ten Cate
JW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haemostasis, Thrombosis, Atherosclerosis and Inflammation Research,
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

1. Disseminated intravascular coagulation frequently accompanies Gram-negative
sepsis and may contribute to widespread deposition of microthrombi. Besides the
endotoxin-induced activation of coagulation, an important role for the
fibrinolytic system has been postulated. The precise mechanisms underlying these 
fibrinolytic changes during endotoxaemia are not known but have been suggested to
be mediated directly by cytokines or secondary to thrombin generation. 2. In the 
present study we have delineated in detail the fibrinolytic response to a bolus
injection of endotoxin in non-human primates and analysed the contribution of
cytokines and thrombin generation to the endotoxin-induced release of tissue-type
plasminogen activator and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1. Chimpanzees received
a bolus injection of endotoxin alone or in combination with blocking monoclonal
antibodies directed against tumour necrosis factor or interleukin 6 or in
combination with pentoxifylline. Furthermore, to assess the effect of coagulation
activation on the activation of fibrinolysis, another group of chimpanzees
received endotoxin in combination with either anti-tissue factor antibodies or
recombinant hirudin. 3. Infusion of endotoxin induced a rapid increase in
plasminogen activator activity and tissue-type plasminogen activator antigen
levels and subsequent plasmin generation, reaching peak levels 2h after endotoxin
administration. Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 levels remained constant for
the first 2 h, after which time a steep increase was observed. Plasminogen
activator activity and plasmin generation decreased simultaneously with the rise 
in plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 levels. Fibrinolytic activity remained
suppressed during the remainder of the study owing to sustained increased levels 
of plasminogen activator inhibitor 1. The administration of pentoxifylline
strongly attenuated the release of tissue-type plasminogen activator and
plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, whereas the antitumour necrosis factor
antibodies blocked the fibrinolytic response entirely. In contrast, interleukin
6-neutralizing antibodies did not affect the fibrinolytic response. Although
endotoxin-induced generation of thrombin was completely prevented by the
administration of tissue factor-neutralizing antibodies or by hirudin, no effect 
on the fibrinolytic response was observed.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1042/cs0880587 
PMID: 7614818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

