
1. Nature. 1995 Jul 20;376(6537):260-3.

A novel receptor involved in T-cell activation.

Cocks BG(1), Chang CC, Carballido JM, Yssel H, de Vries JE, Aversa G.

Author information: 
(1)DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Human Immunology
Department, Palo Alto, California 94304-1104, USA.

Optimal T-cell activation and T-cell expansion require triggering by T-cell
antigen receptors and co-stimulatory signals provided by accessory cells. A major
co-stimulatory pathway involves crosslinking the CD28 molecule on T cells by its 
ligands CD80 or CD86 expressed on antigen-presenting cells. But recent studies on
CD28-deficient mice have indicated that CD28 is not required for all T-cell
responses and that additional T-cell co-stimulatory pathways exist. Here we
describe a novel glycoprotein, of relative molecular mass 70,000 (M(r) 70K),
designated SLAM, that belongs to the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, which is
involved in T-cell stimulation. SLAM is constitutively expressed on
peripheral-blood CD45ROhigh memory T cells, T-cell clones, immature thymocytes,
and a proportion of B cells, and is rapidly induced on naive T cells after
activation. Engagement of SLAM enhances antigen-specific proliferation and
cytokine production by T cells carrying the CD4 antigen (CD4+). Particularly, the
production of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is strongly upregulated, even in T
helper type 2 (Th2) CD4+ T-cell clones, whereas no induction of interleukin
(IL)-4 or IL-5 production was observed in Th1 clones. In addition, the engagement
of SLAM induces directly the proliferation of CD4+ T-cell clones and preactivated
T cells, in the absence of any other stimuli, and without CD28 involvement. Thus 
SLAM is a novel receptor on T cells that, when engaged, potentiates T-cell
expansion in a CD28-independent manner and induces a Th0/Th1 cytokine production 
profile.

DOI: 10.1038/376260a0 
PMID: 7617038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

