
1. Immunol Lett. 1995 Feb;45(1-2):137-42.

The outer surface lipoprotein A of Borrelia burgdorferi provides direct and
indirect augmenting/co-stimulatory signals for the activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells.

Simon MM(1), Nerz G, Kramer MD, Hurtenbach U, Schaible UE, Wallich R.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut f√ºr Immunbiologie, Freiburg, Germany.

Corrected and republished in
    Immunol Lett. 1995 Jun;46(3):137-42.

Naive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells require two distinct signals to proliferate and to
express effector functions [1]. One is provided by the antigen receptor on the T 
cell (TCR) after its encounter with antigenic peptides associated with class I or
II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on antigen-presenting cells
(APC) [2]. The second signal, which is not antigen-specific but essential for
proliferation and differentiation of naive T cells, is provided by co-stimulatory
structures. The major co-stimulatory molecules for CD4+ T cells seem to be B7
[3], B7.2 [4,5], and heat-stable antigen (HSA) [6]. These molecules are expressed
on a variety of naive and/or activated APC and bind to CD28 and CTLA-4 and
possibly other, as yet undefined, TCRs [3,7]. Optimal T cell activation only
occurs when co-stimulatory molecules and ligands for the TCR are expressed on the
same APC [8,9]. However, co-stimulation for T cells may also be provided via
bystander cells [8,9] or by glycoproteins of the extracellular matrix, like
fibronectin [10] and laminin [11]. In this case, T-cell VLA integrins function as
signaling molecules [10,11]. This indicates that antigen-specific T-cell
activation may also occur in areas where antigens are presented in association
with extracellular matrix proteins. The recent finding that the invasion protein 
of Yersinia spp. delivers co-stimulatory signals to anti-CD3-activated human T
cells, most probably through the b1 integrins, suggests that bacterial products
can also bind to contribute to the activation of T cells [12].(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED
AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 7622182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

