
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4260-71.

RelA is a potent transcriptional activator of the CD28 response element within
the interleukin 2 promoter.

Lai JH(1), Horvath G, Subleski J, Bruder J, Ghosh P, Tan TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

T-cell activation requires two different signals. The T-cell receptor's
recognition of a specific antigen on antigen-presenting cells provides one, and
the second signal comes from costimulatory molecules such as CD28. In contrast, T
cells that are stimulated with antigen in the absence of the CD28 costimulatory
signal can become anergic (nonresponsive). The CD28 response element (CD28RE) has
been identified as the DNA element mediating interleukin 2 (IL-2) gene activation
by CD28 costimulation. Our previous work demonstrates that the Rel/NF-kappa B
family proteins c-Rel, RelA (p65), and NFKB1 (p50) are involved in the complex
that binds to the CD28RE. We also showed that c-Rel, but not NFKB1 (p50), can
bind to the CD28RE and activate CD28RE-driven transcription in cotransfection
assays. However, the role of RelA (p65) in CD28 signaling has not yet been
addressed. We provide evidence that RelA (p65) itself bound directly to the
CD28RE of the IL-2 promoter and other lymphokine promoters. In addition, RelA
(p65) was a potent transcriptional activator of the CD28RE in vivo. We show that 
a RelA (p65)-c-Rel heterodimer bound to the CD28RE and synergistically activated 
the CD28RE enhancer activity. We also demonstrate that activated Raf-1 kinase
synergized with RelA (p65) in activating the CD28RE enhancer activity.
Interestingly, a soluble anti-CD28 monoclonal antibody alone, in the absence of
other stimuli, also synergized with RelA (p65) in activating the CD28RE.
Furthermore, we show that RelA (p65) activated expression of the wild-type IL-2
promoter but not the CD28RE-mutated IL-2 promoter. A combination of RelA (p65)
and NFKB1 (p50) also activated the IL-2 promoter through the CD28RE site. These
results demonstrate the functional regulation of the CD28RE, within the IL-2
promoter, by Rel/NF-kappa B transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.15.8.4260 
PMCID: PMC230665
PMID: 7623820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

