
1. Cell Immunol. 1995 Aug;164(1):36-46.

Induction of human T cells that coexpress CD4 and CD8 by an immunomodulatory
protein produced by Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans.

Shenker BJ(1), Vitale L, King C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania School of Dental Medicine,
Philadelphia 19104-6002, USA.

Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, a gram-negative, capnophilic bacterium, is 
associated with several human diseases and is the suspected etiologic agent in
certain forms of periodontal disease. We have previously shown that this organism
produces an immunosuppressive factor (ISF) which is capable of inhibiting both T-
and B-cell activation. Furthermore, these effects appear to be associated with
the activation of a population of suppressor cells. We now report that the ISF
induces a unique population of CD4+CD8+ dual-positive T-cells. By utilizing
multiparameter flow cytometric analysis, we were able to detect the presence of
dual-positive cells in cultures of human T-cells treated with PHA and ISF. The
cells appeared within 48 hr and their induction was dependent upon the presence
of both CD4 and CD8 cells in the culture. Dual expression of CD4 and CD8 was
stable in that the cells continued to express both surface proteins after being
sorted and cultured for an additional 24 hr. Phenotypic analysis indicates that
these cells are also CD3+, CD2+, CD5+, TCR alpha beta+, CD45RA+ (and RO+), and
CD29+. The dual-positive cells express surface markers associated with T-cell
activation: CD25+, CD69+, CD71+, and HLA-DR+. In contrast, the cells were
negative for CD34, CD57, CD56, and CD16. Cell cycle analysis indicates that > 80%
of the dual-positive cells were in the S phase. Finally, functional analysis of
these cells indicates that they are capable of suppressing the proliferative
response of autologous T-cells to PHA.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.1995.1140 
PMID: 7634351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

