
1. Cell Immunol. 1995 Sep;164(2):170-5.

Transcriptional control of IL-2 and IL-4 in T cells of young and old mice.

Albright JW(1), Zúñiga-Pflücker JC, Albright JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, George Washington University School
of Medicine, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

CD4+ T cells of aged compared to young subjects are defective in their responses 
to antigens and soluble mitogens. We asked whether or not there is a defect in
the translocation of transcription factors (TF) in CD4+ T cells of aged mice.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays of three TF that regulate IL-2 gene
expression, viz., Oct1/2, NF kappa B, and AP-1, in nuclear extracts of cells
stimulated with immobilized anti-CD3 epsilon revealed no significant difference
between cells of young and old mice. The nuclear levels of all three TF were
lower in cells of both young and aged mice that were stimulated with Con A and
lower in aged than in young. Similar assays of consensus sequences 1 and 2 (CS1
and CS2) TF involved in IL-4 gene transcription in cells of the Th2 subset
revealed significant translocation of CS1 following stimulation of both young and
aged cells with anti-CD3, more in cells of young than in those of aged mice. In
contrast, the most evident effect of Con A stimulation was the accumulation of
CS2 in nuclei of cells of aged mice. Apparently, there is no detrimental effect
of senescence on the basic mechanisms of translocation of TF. The differences
between stimulation with immobilized anti-CD3 epsilon and Con A can be explained 
by the relative abundance of memory-like CD4+ T cells which accumulate with age
(and are defective in Ca2+ mobilization and signaling) and by the poor ability of
memory-like cells in the aged to respond to CD28 costimulation.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.1995.1158 
PMID: 7656324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

