
1. Z Arztl Fortbild (Jena). 1995 Jun;89(3):279-86.

[Antibiotic treatment of complicated urinary tract infections].

[Article in German]

Peters HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Urologische Abteilung, St. Elisabeth-Krankenhaus KÃ¶ln-Hohenlind.

The diagnosis of an urinary tract infection (UTI) is proved by the identification
of a significant leucocyturia and bacteriuria of the mid-stream urine analysis in
men and catheter urine in women. A diagnostical localisation is possible by the
case history as well as clinical, sonographical and laboratory tests (leucocytes,
CRP) to classify into a cystitis and infection of the parenchyma, respectively an
uncomplicated or complicated UTI. Untreated complicated urinary tract infections 
have a bad prognosis. The therapy consists of bed rest, normalization of the
urinary flow, a specific antibiotic therapy corresponding to the antibiotic
sensitivity pattern and the administration of a
prostaglandin-synthesis-inhibitor. Every physician should choose one of the many 
antibiotics and must get acquainted with the pharmacokinetics and side-effects.
In severe acute infections, a calculated antibiotic therapy in certain
combinations is necessary until the bacteriological findings are known.
Corresponding to the spectrum of bacteria in complicated UTI, one should select a
fluoro-chinolone, a broad-spectrum penicilline in combination with a
beta-lactamase-inhibitor, a cephalosporine of the second and third generation
with a relative stability against beta-lactamase as well as an aminoglycoside.
Reserve-antibiotics for special indications are for example, cefsulodine. Less
effective than the drugs mentioned above is cotrimoxazole, which was favourized
before. In complicated UTI, the older gyrase-inhibitors like nalidixic acid,
pipemidic acid, cinoxacin and nitrofurantoin are not longer indicated. There is
only one indication for the application of doxycyclin: the treatment of bacterial
prostatitis. A lower dosage of antibiotics and a drug therapy of 7-10 days are
sufficient.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 7668016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

