
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Apr 1;90(7):2832-6.

Autoreactive epitopes defined by diabetes-associated human monoclonal antibodies 
are localized in the middle and C-terminal domains of the smaller form of
glutamate decarboxylase.

Richter W(1), Shi Y, Baekkeskov S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, University of California, San Francisco
94143-0534.

The gamma-aminobutyrate-synthesizing enzyme glutamate decarboxylase (GAD;
L-glutamate 1-carboxy-lyase, EC 4.1.1.15) is a major target of autoantibodies
associated with both early and late stages of pancreatic beta-cell destruction
and development of type 1 diabetes. We have used five monoclonal anti-islet-cell 
antibodies (MICAs 1,2,3,4, and 6) derived from a newly diagnosed diabetic patient
to probe the autoimmune epitopes in the enzyme. All the MICAs specifically
recognized the smaller GAD protein, GAD65, and did not recognize the nonallelic
GAD67 protein. A series of N-terminal, C-terminal, and internal deletion mutants,
as well as protein footprinting, were used to identify the target regions in
GAD65. Immunoprecipitation revealed two major native epitope areas in the GAD65
molecule. The first, defined by MICAs 1 and 3, is destroyed by deleting 41 amino 
acids at the C terminus but is also dependent on intact amino acids 244-295. This
epitope (or epitopes) may span both middle and C-terminal domains of the protein.
The second conformational epitope region, defined by MICAs 4 and 6, is dependent 
on intact amino acids 245-295 but is not affected by deletion of 110 amino acids 
at the C terminus and is therefore confined to domain(s) in the middle of the
molecule. MICA 2 recognizes a linear epitope close to the C terminus. Thus, the
N-terminal domain of GAD65, which differs most significantly from GAD67, does not
harbor the MICA epitopes. Rather subtle amino acid differences in the middle and 
C-terminal domains define the GAD65-specific autoimmune epitopes. Analysis of
sera from 10 type 1 diabetic patients suggests that MICAs 1, 3, 4, and 6
represent a common epitope recognition in this disease, whereas the MICA 2
epitope is rare. Furthermore, autoantibodies in some sera are restricted to the
MICA 1/3 epitope, suggesting that this epitope may represent a single dominant
epitope in the early phases of beta-cell autoimmunity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.7.2832 
PMCID: PMC46190
PMID: 7681990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

