
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1993 May;31(5):1027-9.

Rejection criteria for endotracheal aspirates from adults.

Morris AJ(1), Tanner DC, Reller LB.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina 27710.

Comment in
    J Clin Microbiol. 1993 Sep;31(9):2555.

Although criteria have been established to assess the quality of sputum
specimens, no criteria for assessing the quality of endotracheal suction
aspirates (ETSA) exist. Therefore, we compared the Gram stain (GS) and culture
results for 504 consecutive ETSA specimens. Results recorded for GS included the 
numbers of squamous epithelial cells (SEC) and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PML)
per low-power field (LPF) (magnification, x100) as well as the quantities and
types of organisms per high-power field (HPF) (magnification, x1,000). Culture
results were quantitated by organism. Only 15% of ETSA specimens tested by GS
contained > 10 SEC per LPF, and 21, 20, and 59% had < or = 10, 11 to 24, and > or
= 25 PML per LPF, respectively. For 40% of ETSA specimens, no organisms were
visible by GS. Of these specimens, 40% were sterile, 48% grew normal
oropharyngeal flora (NF) only, 5% grew 1+ NF (i.e., > 10 colonies in the first
quadrant) and 1+ gram-negative rods (GNR), and 7% grew < or = 1+ GNR either alone
or in mixed culture. The mean numbers of organisms recovered from ETSA with < or 
= 10 SEC per LPF and > 10 SEC per LPF were 2.35 and 4.05, respectively. We
therefore recommend that ETSA specimens that show no organisms by GS be rejected,
in addition to those with > 10 SEC per LPF. Application of these rejection
criteria enabled us to reject 847 (41%) of 2,068 ETSA specimens over a 6-month
period. This represents a saving of approximately $66,000/year in unnecessary
laboratory charges to patients.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.31.5.1027-1029.1993 
PMCID: PMC262874
PMID: 7684747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

