
1. J Clin Invest. 1993 Sep;92(3):1326-35.

Activation of the alternative complement pathway by exposure of
phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylserine on erythrocytes from sickle cell 
disease patients.

Wang RH(1), Phillips G Jr, Medof ME, Mold C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque 87131.

Deoxygenation of erythrocytes from sickle cell anemia (SCA) patients alters
membrane phospholipid distribution with increased exposure of
phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and phosphatidylserine (PS) on the outer leaflet.
This study investigated whether altered membrane phospholipid exposure on sickle 
erythrocytes results in complement activation. In vitro deoxygenation of sickle
but not normal erythrocytes resulted in complement activation measured by C3
binding. Additional evidence indicated that this activation was the result of the
alterations in membrane phospholipids. First, complement was activated by normal 
erythrocytes after incubation with sodium tetrathionate, which produces similar
phospholipid changes. Second, antibody was not required for complement activation
by sickle or tetrathionate-treated erythrocytes. Third, the membrane regulatory
proteins, decay-accelerating factor (CD55) and the C3b/C4b receptor (CD35), were 
normal on sickle and tetrathionate-treated erythrocytes. Finally, insertion of PE
or PS into normal erythrocytes induced alternative pathway activation. SCA
patients in crisis exhibited increased plasma factor Bb levels compared with
baseline, and erythrocytes isolated from hospitalized SCA patients had increased 
levels of bound C3, indicating that alternative pathway activation occurs in
vivo. Activation of complement may be a contributing factor in sickle crisis
episodes, shortening the life span of erythrocytes and decreasing host defense
against infections.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI116706 
PMCID: PMC288274
PMID: 7690777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

