
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Nov 1;90(21):10275-9.

Direct identification of an endogenous peptide recognized by multiple
HLA-A2.1-specific cytotoxic T cells.

Henderson RA(1), Cox AL, Sakaguchi K, Appella E, Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF,
Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville 22908.

An endogenous peptide recognized by a murine T-cell clone specific for the human 
class I major histocompatibility complex-encoded molecule HLA-A2.1 was identified
through the use of microcapillary high-performance liquid chromatography coupled 
with electrospray-ionization tandem mass spectrometry. The peptide was associated
with HLA-A2.1 on both normal cells and the antigen-processing-mutant cell line
T2. This observation demonstrates that a processing mechanism other than that
involving the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) proteins 1 and
2 can produce peptides that can be recognized by T cells. The peptide was also
recognized by four other independently derived murine HLA-A2.1-specific murine
T-cell clones. This suggests that xenogeneic responses are directed at a
restricted subset of major histocompatibility complex product-associated
peptides. Finally, quantitation of this peptide in cell extracts using mass
spectrometry showed it to be among the most dominant HLA-A2.1 associated species 
on human lymphoid cells. The potential relevance of this observation to models of
alloreactivity will be discussed. The methodology described should be generally
useful for the identification of peptide epitopes recognized by alloreactive,
tumor-specific, and autoimmune T cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.21.10275 
PMCID: PMC47757
PMID: 7694286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

