
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1995 Apr;100(1):21-5.

Effect of postponed treatment with an anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) F(ab')2
fragment on endotoxin-induced cytokine and neutrophil responses in chimpanzees.

van der Poll T(1), Levi M, ten Cate H, Jansen J, Biemond BJ, Haagmans BL,
Eerenberg A, van Deventer SJ, Hack CE, ten Cate JW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Haemostasis, Thrombosis, Atherosclerosis, and Inflammation Research,
Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

TNF is considered to be an intermediate factor in endotoxin-induced release of
other cytokines and endotoxin-induced neutrophil degranulation. Little is known
about the effect of postponed treatment with anti-TNF in primate endotoxin
models. To assess the effect of delayed treatment with anti-TNF in endotoxaemia, 
six healthy adult chimpanzees were intravenously injected with Escherichia coli
endotoxin (4 ng/kg). In three of these animals the administration of endotoxin
was followed after 30 min by a bolus i.v. injection of the anti-TNF F(ab')2
fragment MAK 195F (0.1 mg/kg). Post-treatment with MAK 195F completely prevented 
the appearance of TNF activity in serum elicited by endotoxin, and markedly
reduced the rises in the serum concentrations of IL-6 and IL-8. In addition, the 
endotoxin-induced increases in the type I and type II soluble TNF receptors were 
also profoundly inhibited by MAK 195F, suggesting that TNF is involved in the
release of its own soluble receptors in endotoxaemia. Neutrophilic leucocytosis
was not affected by MAK 195F. In contrast, MAK 195F did significantly abrogate
neutrophil degranulation, as measured by the plasma concentrations of
lactoferrin. These results indicate that treatment with anti-TNF 30 min after the
administration of endotoxin is still effective in attenuating the induction of
the cytokine network and of neutrophil degranulation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.1995.tb03598.x 
PMCID: PMC1534281
PMID: 7697917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

