
1. Yonsei Med J. 1995 Mar;36(1):15-25.

Induction of ICAM-1 and HLA-DR expression by IFN-gamma in malignant melanoma cell
lines.

Kim JD(1), Lee JL, Park JH, Lee JM, Kim YH, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

Two human malignant melanoma cell lines, Malme-3M and SK-Mel-28, were analyzed
for their ability to induce the expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1
(ICAM-1) and human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR molecules on their cell surfaces as
well as at the transcriptional level before and after treatment with interferon
(IFN)-gamma. Both cell lines demonstrated a high percentage (> 99%) of ICAM-1
expression regardless of IFN-gamma treatment. Before IFN-gamma treatment,
Malme-3M cells barely expressed HLA-DR molecules (< 2%) and SK-Mel-28 cells
demonstrated a relatively high percentage (> 50%) of HLA-DR expression. Both cell
lines displayed elevated levels of HLA-DR expression in a time dependent manner
after IFN-gamma treatment. However, these two cell lines have been shown to
respond differentially to IFN-gamma. The molecular mechanism underlying such a
differential behavior was investigated, and HLA-DR gene regulation was studied at
the transcriptional level. Treatment with IFN-gamma led to the steady-state mRNA 
augmentation of the HLR-DR gene. The HLA-DRA mRNA augmentation was similar in
both cell lines, whereas in Malme-3M, IFN-gamma did not augment the rate of
transcription of the HLA-DRB gene as much as in SK-Mel-28. Data from this study
established the fact that the melanoma cell lines displayed a differential
susceptibility to IFN-gamma on the modulation of HLA-DR molecules, and this
modulation was transcriptionally regulated.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.1995.36.1.15 
PMID: 7740833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

