
1. J Bacteriol. 1995 May;177(10):2863-9.

Characterization of the proton/glutamate symport protein of Bacillus subtilis and
its functional expression in Escherichia coli.

Tolner B(1), Ubbink-Kok T, Poolman B, Konings WN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Groningen, Haren, The Netherlands.

Transport of acidic amino acids in Bacillus subtilis is an electrogenic process
in which L-glutamate or L-aspartate is symported with at least two protons. This 
is shown by studies of transport in membrane vesicles in which a proton motive
force is generated by oxidation of ascorbate-phenazine methosulfate or by
artificial ion gradients. An inwards-directed sodium gradient had no
(stimulatory) effect on proton motive force-driven L-glutamate uptake. The
transporter is specific for L-glutamate and L-aspartate. L-Glutamate transport is
inhibited by beta-hydroxyaspartate and cysteic acid but not by
alpha-methyl-glutamate. The gene encoding the L-glutamate transport protein of B.
subtilis (gltPBsu) was cloned by complementation of Escherichia coli JC5412 for
growth on glutamate as the sole source of carbon, energy, and nitrogen, and its
nucleotide sequence was determined. Putative promoter, terminator, and ribosome
binding site sequences were found in the flanking regions. UUG is most likely the
start codon. gltPBsu encodes a polypeptide of 414 amino acid residues and is
homologous to several proteins that transport glutamate and/or structurally
related compounds such as aspartate, fumarate, malate, and succinate. Both
sodium- and proton-coupled transporters belong to this family of dicarboxylate
transporters. Hydropathy profiling and multiple alignment of the family of
carboxylate transporters suggest that each of the proteins spans the cytoplasmic 
membrane 12 times with both the amino and carboxy termini on the inside.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.10.2863-2869.1995 
PMCID: PMC176960
PMID: 7751298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

