
1. J Periodontol. 1995 Apr;66(4):279-84.

Modulation by progesterone of interleukin-6 production by gingival fibroblasts.

Lapp CA(1), Thomas ME, Lewis JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, USA.

The gingivitis associated with pregnancy has been attributed to increased
concentrations of circulating estrogen and/or progesterone. However, the
mechanism by which these steroids increase gingival inflammation is not known.
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), a pleiotropic cytokine produced by many cell types
including human gingival fibroblasts (hGF), is secreted in response to
inflammatory challenges such as bacterial lipopolysaccharide and interleukin-1
(IL-1). This study tested the hypothesis that progesterone could modulate the
local production of IL-6 by hGF. The effects of progesterone on IL-6 production
were measured in vitro in serum-free, phenol red-free medium to eliminate
possible effects of such medium additives. The concentration of IL-6 secreted
into supernatant medium after a 24 hour challenge with IL-1 beta was estimated by
radioimmunoassay. Total RNA from steroid-treated hGF was probed for IL-6 mRNA. In
serum-free medium, progesterone dose-dependently and significantly (P < 0.05)
inhibited IL-6 production by hGF, as did the glucocorticoids hydrocortisone (HC) 
and dexamethasone. At progesterone concentrations common in late pregnancy, IL-6 
production was reduced to levels 40 to 50% of control. In addition, mRNA was
significantly down-regulated by progesterone and HC, at both basal levels and
after IL-1 beta challenge. These results suggest that high levels of progesterone
during pregnancy affect the development of localized inflammation by
down-regulation of IL-6 production, rendering the gingiva less efficient at
resisting the inflammatory challenges produced by bacteria.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.1995.66.4.279 
PMID: 7782982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

