
1. Genomics. 1994 Jul 15;22(2):257-66.

Mapping and characterization of non-HLA multigene assemblages in the human MHC
class I region.

Venditti CP(1), Harris JM, Geraghty DE, Chorney MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center 17033.

The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I region has been shown to be
associated with a variety of immune and nonimmune disorders. In an effort to
initiate steps designed to identify the idiopathic hemochromatosis disease gene
(HFE), we have cloned and mapped two expressed messages using probes from the
HLA-H subregion that lie immediately distal to the HLA-A9 breakpoint. Although
the cDNA clones identify distinct multifragment families that are dispersed
throughout the MHC, the gene sequences from which the two cDNA clones derive map 
centromeric to the HLA-B locus and are absent from the genomes of higher nonhuman
primates. This suggests that a syntenic coding segment arose within a highly
polymorphic region (TNF to HLA-B interval) as the result of an insertion event
following the emergence of Homo sapiens. An additional syntenic cluster exists
within a peak of linkage disequilibrium with the HFE gene and may define coding
sequences that underlie the defect in genetic iron overload. These data generally
support the concept that the class I region is potentially gene-rich and further 
highlight the possibility that these new coding sequences may play a role in the 
development of a variety of HLA-linked diseases. The observations presented
suggest that interlocus exchanges have played a structural role in the genesis of
the human class I region.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1994.1382 
PMID: 7806210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

