
1. Environ Health Perspect. 1994 Oct;102 Suppl 4:61-6.

Ambient air pollutants in upper Silesia: partial chemical composition and
biological activity.

Chorazy M(1), Szeliga J, Str√≥zyk M, Cimander B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute of Oncology, Gliwice, Poland.

The air monitoring system in Upper Silesia has provided abundant data on airborne
pollutants. Air quality in this region is bad: a concentration of several gases, 
volatile compounds, metals, and complex mixtures of organic compounds carried by 
small particulate matter exceeds both daily and yearly admissible levels. About
250 individual polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbonds (PAHs) were identified in
airborne pollutants, and hundreds of not identified compounds are seen on gas
chromatographic profiles as minor peaks. Among PAHs are present compounds with
known carcinogenic potency for humans. Seasonal variation with distinctly lower
concentration of pollutants in summer than in winter was noticed. Fifteen PAHs
including benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) determined by GC-MS method in 20 measuring
points showed constant relative proportions. Thus B[a]P could be used as a
representative compound for other PAHs. In urban areas, a core of Silesia values 
for B[a]P concentration ranged from 60 to 90 ng/m3 in winter to 5 to 20
micrograms/m in summer. Mutagenicity tested on Salmonella strains showed seasonal
variation with distinctly higher values in winter. Environmentally exposed humans
showed a higher level of PAH-DNA adducts in WBC than the control population from 
rural area. Total organic extract of small particulate matter exhibited both
direct and indirect mutagenic activity, induced formation of micronuclei in bone 
marrow cells of BALB/c mice, induced chromosomal rearrangements, and increased
sister chromatid exchange index.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.94102s461 
PMCID: PMC1566945
PMID: 7821297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

