
1. J Immunol. 1995 Feb 1;154(3):1078-87.

Requirement of CTLA-4 counter receptors for IL-4 but not IL-10 elevations during 
a primary systemic in vivo immune response.

Lu P(1), Zhou XD, Chen SJ, Moorman M, Schoneveld A, Morris S, Finkelman FD,
Linsley P, Claassen E, Gause WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814.

The CD28/CTLA-4 costimulatory signal is required for TCR-mediated T cell
activation resulting in increased IL-2 production in vitro, but its role in IL-4 
production is unclear and few studies have examined the function of CTLA-4/CD28
in the in vivo immune response. We have examined the in vivo effects of blocking 
the interaction of B7 with its ligands, CTLA-4 and CD28, in an IL-4 dominant in
vivo immune response to goat anti-mouse IgD. This response is characterized by
elevations in serum Igs preceded by elevations in IL-2 and the Th2 cytokines:
IL-4, IL-9, and IL-10. The fusion protein CTLA4-Ig administered during the in
vivo immune response to goat anti-mouse IgD caused an inhibition in elevations of
IL-2, IL-4, and IL-9 gene expression at both day 3 and day 6 after immunization. 
In contrast, IL-10 cytokine gene expression as late as day 6 after immunization
was not decreased. Cell sorting analysis demonstrated that TCR-alpha beta +, CD4+
T cells were the primary source of the elevated IL-10, suggesting that T cell
activation leading to IL-10 gene expression may not require CTLA-4 ligand
interactions. Similarly CTLA4-Ig completely blocked elevations in the number of
IL-4- but not IL-10-secreting cells, as measured by ELISPOT, in both unsorted
splenic cells and sorted CD4+, TCR-alpha beta+ T cells. In situ staining of
spleen sections also showed inhibition of IL-4-producing cells. These results
suggest that, with the notable exception of IL-10, interaction, of B7 with its
ligands is required for elevated Th2 cytokine gene expression and secretion
during a primary systemic IL-4-dominant response.


PMID: 7822784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

