
1. J Appl Bacteriol. 1994 Dec;77(6):709-18.

Microbial succession and intestinal enzyme activities in the developing rat.

Chang J(1), Chadwick RW, Allison JC, Hayes YO, Talley DL, Autry CE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill.

The succession of gut bacteria and selected intestinal enzyme activities in
developing 7-35-d-old rats was studied. Aerobes and anaerobes were identified as 
members of four broad major bacterial groups, i.e. Gram-positive rods,
Gram-positive cocci, Gram-negative rods and obligate anaerobes. The enzyme
activities of nitro and azo reductases, beta-glucuronidase, dechlorinase and
dehydrochlorinase were determined by anaerobic incubation of intestinal
homogenates with 3,4-dichloronitrobenzene, methyl orange,
p-nitrophenyl-beta-D-glucuronide, and p,p'-DDT respectively. Nitroreductase and
azo reductase activities increased significantly with the appearance of anaerobes
in the large intestine. No increase in either nitroreductase or azo reductase
activities in the small intestine was found. The early and high level of
beta-glucuronidase activity in the small and large intestines coincided with high
numbers of coliforms recovered in 7 and 14 d animals. Dehydrochlorinase activity 
appeared early but was undetectable at both 21 and 28 d. Its activity increased
at 35 d. Dechlorinase activity was variable in development. The rapid changes in 
the microbial flora and intestinal enzyme activities may influence the
susceptibility of pre-pubescent rats to a variety of toxicants. Therefore,
age-dependent toxicity may be important in the risk assessment of some
environmental chemicals.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.1994.tb02823.x 
PMID: 7822231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

