
1. Blood. 1995 Feb 1;85(3):675-84.

Expression of TAL-1 proteins in human tissues.

Pulford K(1), Lecointe N, Leroy-Viard K, Jones M, Mathieu-Mahul D, Mason DY.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Cellular Science, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
UK.

Rearrangement of the tal-1 gene (also known as SCL or TCL-5) occurs in at least
25% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALLs) and results in the aberrant 
expression of tal-1 mRNA in the neoplastic cells. Also, tal-1 mRNA is
constitutively expressed in erythroid precursors and megakaryocytes. This report 
describes a direct immunocytochemical study of the distribution and localization 
of TAL-1 protein in normal human tissues and cell lines using four monoclonal
antibodies raised against recombinant TAL-1 proteins. One of these reagents
recognizes a protein of 41 kD molecular weight in in vitro-translated TAL-1
proteins, two others recognize proteins of 39 and 41 kD molecular weight, and the
fourth antibody also recognizes a TAL-1 protein of 22 kD in addition to the 39-
and 41-kD proteins. These anti-TAL-1 antibodies label the nuclei of erythroid
precursor cells and megakaryocytes in fetal liver and adult bone marrow. The
punctate pattern of nuclear labeling suggests that TAL-1 may comprise part of a
novel nuclear structure, similar to that recently found for the PML protein. The 
nuclei of T cell lines known to express mRNA encoding the full-length TAL-1
protein (eg, CCRF-CEM, RPMI 8402, and Jurkat) are also labeled. A study of normal
human tissues (including thymus) showed labeling of smooth muscle, some tissue
macrophages, and endothelial cells. TAL-1 protein is undetectable in other cell
types. These reagents may play an important role in the diagnosis of T-ALL and
could also be used in the context of lymphoma diagnosis on routinely fixed
material.


PMID: 7833471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

