
1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 24;270(8):3527-33.

The transcriptional regulatory protein, YB-1, promotes single-stranded regions in
the DRA promoter.

MacDonald GH(1), Itoh-Lindstrom Y, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill 27599-7295.

YB-1 is a member of a newly defined family of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins, the 
Y box factors. These proteins have been shown to affect gene expression at both
the transcriptional and translational levels. Recently, we showed that YB-1
represses interferon-gamma-induced transcription of class II human major
histocompatibility (MHC) genes (1). Studies in this report characterize the DNA
binding properties of purified, recombinant YB-1 on the MHC class II DRA
promoter. The generation of YB-1-specific antibodies further permitted an
analysis of the DNA binding properties of endogenous YB-1. YB-1 specifically
binds single-stranded templates of the DRA promoter with greater affinity than
double-stranded templates. The single-stranded DNA binding sites of YB-1 were
mapped to the X box, whereas the double-stranded binding sites were mapped to the
Y box of the DRA promoter, by methylation interference analysis. Most
significantly, YB-1 can induce or stabilize single-stranded regions in the X and 
Y elements of the DRA promoter, as revealed by mung bean nuclease analysis. In
concert with the findings that YB-1 represses DRA transcription, this study of
YB-1 binding properties suggests a model of repression in which YB-1 binding
results in single-stranded regions within the promoter, thus preventing loading
and/or function of other DRA-specific transactivating factors.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.8.3527 
PMID: 7876087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

