
1. J Bacteriol. 1993 Nov;175(22):7391-403.

Characterization of fimbriae produced by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Girón JA(1), Ho AS, Schoolnik GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Stanford University, California 94305.

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) express rope-like bundles of filaments, 
termed bundle-forming pili (BFP) (J. A. Girón, A. S. Y. Ho, and G. K. Schoolnik, 
Science 254:710-713, 1991). Expression of BFP is associated with localized
adherence to HEp-2 cells and the presence of the EPEC adherence factor plasmid.
In this study, we describe the identification of rod-like fimbriae and fibrillae 
expressed simultaneously on the bacterial surface of three prototype EPEC
strains. Upon fimbrial extraction from EPEC B171 (O111:NM), three fimbrial
subunits with masses of 16.5, 15.5, and 14.7 kDa were separated by sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Their N-terminal amino acid sequence 
showed homology with F9 and F7(2) fimbriae of uropathogenic E. coli and F1845 of 
diffuse-adhering E. coli, respectively. The mixture of fimbrial subunits (called 
FB171) exhibited mannose-resistant agglutination of human erythrocytes only, and 
this activity was not inhibited by alpha-D-Gal(1-4)-beta-Gal disaccharide or any 
other described receptor analogs for P, S, F, M, G, and Dr hemagglutinins of
uropathogenic E. coli, which suggests a different receptor specificity.
Hemagglutination was inhibited by extracellular matrix glycoproteins, i.e.,
collagen type IV, laminin, and fibronectin, and to a lesser extent by
gangliosides, fetuin, and asialofetuin. Scanning electron microscopic studies
performed on clusters of bacteria adhering to HEp-2 cells revealed the presence
of structures resembling BFP and rod-like fimbriae linking bacteria to bacteria
and bacteria to the eukaryotic cell membrane. We suggest a role of these surface 
appendages in the interaction of EPEC with eukaryotic cells as well as in the
overall pathogenesis of intestinal disease caused by EPEC.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.175.22.7391-7403.1993 
PMCID: PMC206884
PMID: 7901197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

