
1. J Exp Med. 1994 Apr 1;179(4):1285-95.

CD4pos, NK1.1pos T cells promptly produce interleukin 4 in response to in vivo
challenge with anti-CD3.

Yoshimoto T(1), Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Injection of anti-CD3 antibodies causes prompt expression of interleukin (IL)-4, 
IL-2, and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) mRNA among spleen cells. The optimal dose 
of anti-CD3 for such induction was 1.33 microgram/animal; lymphokine mRNA was
first observed at 30 min, peaked at 90 min, and was undetectable (for IL-4) or
had declined markedly by 4 h. Cells harvested from spleens of mice injected with 
anti-CD3 90 min earlier secreted IL-4, IL-2, and IFN-gamma without further
stimulation. By contrast, in vitro stimulation with anti-CD3 of spleen cell
suspensions or splenic fragments from noninjected donors failed to cause prompt
production of IL-4 and, even after 24 h of stimulation, the amount of IL-4
produced in such cells was substantially less than that secreted within 1 h by
spleen cell suspensions or splenic fragments from mice injected with anti-CD3 90 
min earlier. Production of IL-4 by spleen cells from anti-CD3-injected mice was
not inhibited by pretreatment with anti-IL-4 antibody or with IFN-gamma or tumor 
growth factor beta nor enhanced by treatment with IL-4. By contrast, CTLA-4
immunoglobulin (Ig) treatment clearly diminished IL-4 production in response to
in vivo anti-CD3, indicating that cellular interactions involving CD28 (or
related molecules) were important in stimulation. Cell sorting analysis indicated
that the cells that produced IL-4 in response to in vivo injection of anti-CD3
were highly enriched in CD4pos cells with the phenotype leukocyte cell adhesion
molecule-1 (LECAM-1)dull, CD44bright, CD45RBdull, NK1.1pos. Indeed, the small
population of CD4pos, NK1.1pos cells had the great majority of the IL-4-producing
activity of this population. Injection with Staphylococcal enterotoxin B also
caused prompt induction of IL-4 mRNA; the cells that were principally responsible
for production also had the phenotype of CD4pos, NK1.1pos. These results suggest 
that possibility that this rare population of T cells may be capable of secreting
IL-4 at the outset of immune responses and thus may act to regulate the pattern
of priming of naive T cells, by providing a source of IL-4 to favor the
development of T cell helper 2-like IL-4-producing cells.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.179.4.1285 
PMCID: PMC2191455
PMID: 7908323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

