
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Oct;14(10):6839-47.

Functional complementation of major histocompatibility complex class II
regulatory mutants by the purified X-box-binding protein RFX.

Durand B(1), Kobr M, Reith W, Mach B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, 
Centre MÃ©dical Universitaire, Switzerland.

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II deficiency, or bare lymphocyte
syndrome (BLS), is a disease of gene regulation. Patients with BLS have been
classified into at least three complementation groups (A, B, and C) believed to
correspond to three distinct MHC class II regulatory genes. The elucidation of
the molecular basis for this disease will thus clarify the mechanisms controlling
the complex regulation of MHC class II genes. Complementation groups B and C are 
characterized by a lack of binding of RFX, a nuclear protein that normally binds 
specifically to the X box cis-acting element present in the promoters of all MHC 
class II genes. We have now purified RFX to near homogeneity by affinity
chromatography. Using an in vitro transcription system based on the HLA-DRA
promoter, we show here that extracts from RFX-deficient cells from patients with 
BLS (BLS cells) in groups B and C, which are transcriptionally inactive in this
assay, can be complemented to full transcriptional activity by the purified RFX. 
As expected, purified RFX also restores a completely normal pattern of X
box-binding complexes in these mutant extracts. This provides the first direct
functional evidence that RFX is an activator of MHC class II gene transcription
and that its absence is indeed responsible for the regulatory defect in MHC class
II gene expression in patients with BLS.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.14.10.6839 
PMCID: PMC359214
PMID: 7935401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

