
1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 11;269(45):27876-84.

Biochemical characterization of Drosophila glutathione S-transferases D1 and D21.

Tang AH(1), Tu CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park 16802.

The genomic DNA for the two Drosophila genes, gstD1 and gstD21, were engineered
for expression in Escherichia coli by polymerase chain reaction using a pair of
specially designed primers. This newly designed expression system produced
consistently high yields of the recombinant glutathione S-transferases (GSTs),
which were purified to electrophoretic homogeneity by S-hexyl-GSH affinity
chromatography. Consistent with their differences in size, GST D1 and GST D21
displayed different mobilities on SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Circular dichroism spectrometry revealed some differences in the protein
secondary structural organization between the two GST D isozymes. Polyclonal
antibodies against GST D1 and GST D21 revealed that they are immunologically
distinct from each other. The GST D1 antiserum cross-reacted weakly with GST D21,
but the GST D21 antiserum had no detectable cross-reactivity with GST D1. The
amino acid sequences of GST D1 and GST D21 have 70% identity. GST D1 is active
toward CDNB with 17% of the catalytic efficiency of the human alpha GST121,
whereas CDNB is a poor substrate for GST D21. Both GST D1 and GST D21 have
similar levels of GSH peroxidase activity against cumene hydroperoxide. Another
major difference in substrate specificities between GST D1 and GST D21 is in the 
activity of 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis-(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT)
dehydrochlorinase, which exists only in the GST D1 isozyme. This is the first
definitive demonstration that DDT dehydrochlorinase activity is an intrinsic
property of a Drosophila GST. Our results suggest that GST D1 may play a role in 
DDT metabolism in Drosophila.


PMID: 7961718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

