
1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 2;269(48):30077-80.

CD28 signaling causes a sustained down-regulation of I kappa B alpha which can be
prevented by the immunosuppressant rapamycin.

Lai JH(1), Tan TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030.

CD28, an important T cell surface molecule, mediates a costimulatory signal in
the activation of T cell immune responses. CD28 signaling is resistant to the
immunosuppressant cyclosporin A (CsA) but sensitive to the immunosuppressant
rapamycin. CD28 costimulation induces transcription from the interleukin (IL)-2
promoter via the CD28 response element. The levels of c-Rel, a CD28 response
element-binding factor, were found previously to be increased by CD28
costimulation. Therefore, we focused our present study on the mechanism(s) of
c-Rel up-regulation by CD28 signaling in Jurkat T cells. In this paper, we showed
that CD28 costimulation accelerated the kinetics of nuclear translocation of
c-Rel. We showed that CD28 signaling, distinct from other stimuli such as phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate, IL-1, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, caused a
sustained down-regulation of the inhibitor I kappa B alpha in Jurkat T cells.
However, the levels of two other c-Rel inhibitors, namely NFKB1 (p105) and NFKB2 
(p100), were not affected. Remarkably, the CD28-mediated down-regulation of I
kappa B alpha was prevented by rapamycin but not by CsA. The counter-regulation
of I kappa B alpha by CD28 signaling and rapamycin observed in Jurkat T cells is 
also reproducible in primary T cells. In contrast, the phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate/ionomycin-mediated down-regulation of I kappa B alpha was prevented by
CsA but not by rapamycin. Our data suggest that I kappa B alpha is the
down-stream target of both CD28 signaling and rapamycin; a continued
down-regulation of I kappa B alpha by CD28 costimulation leads to enhanced
nuclear translocation of c-Rel, which in turn causes a sustained up-regulation of
IL-2 gene expression.


PMID: 7982907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

