
1. J Immunol. 1995 Jan 1;154(1):375-86.

Ig-binding surface proteins of Streptococcus pyogenes also bind human C4b-binding
protein (C4BP), a regulatory component of the complement system.

Thern A(1), Stenberg L, Dahlbäck B, Lindahl G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Lund University, Sölvegatan, Sweden.

Streptococcus pyogenes, an important human pathogen, expresses several proteins
that interact with the immune system of the host. Among the proteins isolated
from different bacterial strains are antiphagocytic M proteins, Ig Fc-binding
proteins and exotoxins that act as superantigens. Here we report a novel
interaction between S. pyogenes and the human immune system, the ability of most 
S. pyogenes strains to bind human C4BP (C4b-binding protein), a 570-kDa serum
protein that inhibits the classical pathway of complement activation. Molecular
analysis of three different streptococcal strains demonstrated that C4BP binds to
protein Arp or protein Sir, two Ig-binding cell surface molecules that are
members of the M protein family. These bacterial proteins have separate high
affinity binding sites for Ig and for C4BP, as demonstrated by inhibition tests
and binding assays with purified components. A single streptococcal cell surface 
molecule, Arp or Sir, therefore combines the abilities to bind Ig and C4BP, two
high m.w. components of the immune system. Two bacterial strains expressing Arp
or Sir were shown to selectively bind C4BP in whole human serum, suggesting that 
S. pyogenes also binds C4BP in the infected host. When bound to streptococcal
cells, C4BP retained its ability to act as a cofactor in the degradation of C4b
by factor I. These results indicate that many strains of S. pyogenes interfere
with the classical pathway of complement activation by binding C4BP to the
bacterial cell surface.


PMID: 7995956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

