
1. J Exp Med. 1994 Aug 1;180(2):693-8.

CTLA-4 ligands are required to induce an in vivo interleukin 4 response to a
gastrointestinal nematode parasite.

Lu P(1), Zhou X, Chen SJ, Moorman M, Morris SC, Finkelman FD, Linsley P, Urban
JF, Gause WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 20814.

The costimulatory signal provided to T cells through CTLA-4-ligand interactions
is required for T cell activation resulting in increased interleukin 2 (IL-2)
production in vitro, but its role in the production of IL-4 and other cytokines
is unclear and few in vivo studies have been performed to confirm results of in
vitro experiments. We have examined the in vivo effects of blocking CTLA-4
ligands on the T helper cell 2 (Th2)-associated mucosal immune response that
follows oral infection of mice with the nematode parasite, Heligmosomoides
polygyrus. CTLA-4Ig administration inhibited H. polygyrus-induced increases in
mesenteric lymph node (MLN) B cell major histocompatibility complex class II
expression and size and T cell-derived IL-4 gene expression. In addition, CTLA-4 
immunoglobulin (Ig) partially blocked increased IL-3, IL-5, and IL-9 cytokine
gene expression in Peyer's patch (PP) and MLN 8 d after primary inoculation of
mice with the parasite. Increases in the number of IL-4- but not IL-5-secreting
cells were also inhibited by CTLA-4Ig. H. polygyrus-induced elevations in serum
IgE levels but not blood eosinophils, were markedly inhibited by CTLA-4Ig. These 
results suggest that stimulation of CD28 and/or CTLA-4 is required for T cell
priming leading to IL-4 cytokine production, B cell activation, and IgE secretion
during a Th2-like, mucosal immune response to a nematode parasite.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.180.2.693 
PMCID: PMC2191583
PMID: 8046343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

