
1. Eur J Cancer Prev. 1994 May;3(3):247-57.

Helicobacter pylori: the link with gastric cancer.

De Koster E(1), Buset M, Fernandes E, Deltenre M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Brugmann University Hospital, Brussels,
Belgium.

Gastric cancer is the world's overall second most common cancer, and carries a
bad prognosis. In the Correa model of gastric carcinogenesis, environmental
factors (salt, nitrate, a lack of vitamin C and beta-carotene, bile reflux,
bacterial overgrowth in atrophic gastritis with nitrosamine formation) are
related to the evolution from normal gastric tissue through superficial
gastritis, multifocal atrophic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia and dysplasia to 
carcinoma. The incidence of H. pylori decreases with progressing preneoplastic
lesions. In several studies, the prevalence of H. pylori was elevated in patients
with gastric cancer, with a trend for a higher prevalence in intestinal type
gastric cancer vs diffuse type. Family members of patients with gastric
adenocarcinoma have a higher H. pylori prevalence than controls; patients
infected with H. pylori have more family members with gastric cancer. Several
epidemiological studies showed a higher H. pylori prevalence in regions or
populations with high gastric cancer risk vs low-risk populations. Large-scale
studies in China and Europe showed a correlation between H. pylori seroprevalence
and gastric cancer incidence and mortality. Three prospective nested case-control
studies showed that infection with H. pylori increased the risk of further
development of gastric adenocarcinoma, showing that H. pylori infection precedes 
the development of gastric cancer. Several pathways can be identified explaining 
the association between H. pylori and gastric adenocarcinoma. We showed that
gastric cell proliferation is increased in parallel with inflammation. The
ascorbic acid concentrating mechanism is abolished in gastritis. Ammonia,
generated by H. pylori's urease, gives rise to gastric mucosal atrophy. We showed
that salt increases the gastric cell proliferation only in H. pylori-infected
individuals. The organism's toxin may play a role in gastric cancer. Besides H.
pylori, other environmental factors are important in determining the gastric
cancer risk. For instance, we showed that in Belgium, Maghreb immigrants have a
high prevalence of H. pylori infection but a low prevalence of intestinal
metaplasia and gastric cancer. Gastric lymphoma is rare (about 5% of all gastric 
tumours), but its incidence is steadily increasing. It was shown that H. pylori
also increases the risk for low-grade as well as high-grade gastric lymphoma.
Eradication of H. pylori has been shown to cure several cases of unequivocally
proven gastric low-grade lymphoma.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1097/00008469-199403030-00003 
PMID: 8061590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

