
1. EMBO J. 1994 Sep 1;13(17):4042-53.

CCAAT box binding protein NF-Y facilitates in vivo recruitment of upstream DNA
binding transcription factors.

Wright KL(1), Vilen BJ, Itoh-Lindstrom Y, Moore TL, Li G, Criscitiello M,
Cogswell P, Clarke JB, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology-Immunology,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 27599.

NF-Y binds a CCAAT motif found in many eukaryotic polymerase II-dependent
promoters. In the HLA-DRA promoter it has been demonstrated that stereo-specific 
alignment between this motif and the upstream elements X1 and X2 is required for 
activation. To study the underlying mechanism for this requirement, a panel of
transfected cell lines that maintained integrated, wild-type and mutant promoters
were analyzed by in vivo genomic footprinting. Cell lines harboring a mutated
CCAAT element exhibited a loss of interactions at the CCAAT site, as expected,
and no transcriptional activity. Most importantly, mutation of the CCAAT sequence
nearly abolished in vivo binding at the X1 and X2 sites, while mutations of X1
and X2 had little effect on CCAAT box binding. However, X1 and X2 binding was
interdependent. In vitro, X1 binding activities are known to be stabilized by
NF-Y binding. Interaction between NF-Y and X box binding proteins was
demonstrated by reciprocal co-immunoprecipitation in the absence of DNA and
co-affinity purification in the presence of DNA. Collectively, these studies
indicate that occupancy of the CCAAT element represents an early event affecting 
other protein-DNA interactions and suggest that NF-Y stabilizes and interacts
with X box factors to mediate this function. These findings may represent a
common theme among promoters containing a CCAAT element.


PMCID: PMC395325
PMID: 8076600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

