
1. J Bacteriol. 1994 Mar;176(5):1287-96.

A rationale for autoinduction of a transcriptional activator: ethanolamine
ammonia-lyase (EutBC) and the operon activator (EutR) compete for
adenosyl-cobalamin in Salmonella typhimurium.

Sheppard DE(1), Roth JR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life and Health Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark 19716.

The ethanolamine utilization (eut) operon of Salmonella typhimurium is controlled
by a positive regulatory protein (EutR) which stimulates eut operon expression in
response to the simultaneous presence of two effectors, ethanolamine and
adenosyl-cobalamin (Ado-B12). Ado-B12 is a cofactor for ethanolamine
ammonia-lyase (lyase), the first enzyme in the ethanolamine-degradative pathway. 
The dependence of this pathway on the use of Ado-B12 as an effector in eut operon
induction may be explained by its role in the degradation of ethanolamine and the
fact that this cofactor is not always made by S. typhimurium. The eutR gene lies 
within the eut operon, and its autoinduction is required for maximum operon
expression. Evidence is presented that the placement of the eutR regulatory gene 
within the operon provides a means of balancing the competition between lyase and
the regulatory protein for a very small pool of Ado-B12. Since both lyase and the
regulatory protein are induced, they can compete more equally for a small pool of
Ado-B12. This permits both continued eut operon induction and lyase activity. Two
general observations support this model. First, mutations that inactivate lyase
allow the operon to be fully induced by a lower level of exogenous cobalamin
(CN-B12) than required by a wild-type operon. This increase in sensitivity is
measured as a reduction in the apparent Km for operon induction by exogenous
CN-B12. Second, the maximum level of operon induction by excess CN-B12 is
dictated by the level of EutR regulatory protein, regardless of the level of
lyase.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.176.5.1287-1296.1994 
PMCID: PMC205191
PMID: 8113167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

