
1. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1994 Apr;71(1):8-13.

A phenotypic study of CD8+ lymphocyte subsets in infants using three-color flow
cytometry.

Jennings C(1), Rich K, Siegel JN, Landay A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology/Microbiology, Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612.

Flow cytometry is a powerful tool for the multiparametric evaluation of cell
surface phenotype in patients with HIV disease. Many cell surface molecules can
be evaluated by three-color flow cytometry and the markers correlated with
functional activity. It has recently been recognized in adults that the CD8 cell 
is an important lymphocyte subset in HIV disease that correlates with disease
outcome, but there is little information about CD8 subsets in infants. Therefore,
we studied infants born to HIV-infected mothers and those born to uninfected
mothers. No significant differences were seen in phenotypic markers of activation
(CD38, HLA-DR), maturation (CD45RO, CD45RA), and function (CD28) between
uninfected infants born to HIV infected or uninfected mothers. In HIV-infected
infants, a substantial increase in CD8+ CD38+ HLA-DR+ expression was seen. In
addition, we found that there was a significant increase in the CD8+ CD45RO+
CD45RA- subset which is characteristic of the memory phenotype. Finally,
evaluation of CD28 (costimulatory molecule involved in T cell activation), which 
is expressed on almost all CD8 cells at birth, showed that this population was
significantly reduced in infected infants. These studies suggest that three-color
flow cytometry is a powerful tool for evaluating phenotypic changes in lymphocyte
subsets and enhancing our understanding of the pathobiology of HIV disease.

DOI: 10.1006/clin.1994.1044 
PMID: 8137561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

