
1. J Oral Pathol Med. 1993 Aug;22(7):292-7.

Oral Kaposi's sarcoma: a 10-year retrospective histopathologic study.

Regezi JA(1), MacPhail LA, Daniels TE, Greenspan JS, Greenspan D, Dodd CL,
Lozada-Nur F, Heinic GS, Chinn H, Silverman S Jr, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of California, San 
Francisco 94143-0424.

Microscopic diagnosis of early Kaposi's sarcoma continues to be a challenge to
the pathologist, as does the identification of bacillary angiomatosis (BA) which 
may have a similar appearance. 120 oral Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) biopsies submitted 
to the UCSF oral pathology service from 1981-1991 were reviewed in order to
describe the clinical-pathologic spectrum of these lesions and to search for
unrecognized cases of BA. Also, histopathologic features of oral KS were compared
to 30 oral pyogenic granulomas, and immunohistochemical stains for
endothelium-associated CD34 antigen were done. The diagnosis of KS was confirmed 
in all biopsies and no cases of BA were found. Histologically, the KS specimens
exhibited numerous features that separated them from pyogenic granulomas, and
could themselves be divided into two clinical-pathologic subtypes: small,
well-delineated macular lesions (31), which were characterized by inconspicuous
patches of spindle cells containing ill-defined vascular spaces; and larger,
infiltrative nodular lesions (89), which were characterized by spindle cells
lining vascular slits and bizarre-shaped vessels. Extravasated RBCs were evident 
in almost all KS lesions; hemosiderin deposits and hyaline globules were seen in 
half of each of the small and large lesions. Nuclear atypia was minimal and
mitotic activity was slight. Lymphocytes in small lesions added to the difficulty
of microscopic interpretation of these incipient lesions. CD34 was expressed on
all spindle cells lining vascular spaces in larger lesions and on spindle cells
of small, subtle lesions. We conclude that within the spectrum of lesions that
are diagnosed as oral KS, two clinical-pathologic types can be identified:
macular small spindle-cell lesions and nodular infiltrative vascular
lesions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.1993.tb01075.x 
PMID: 8229865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

