
1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Dec 15;268(35):26328-33.

Human major histocompatibility complex class II-associated invariant chain gene
promoter. Functional analysis and in vivo protein/DNA interactions of
constitutive and IFN-gamma-induced expression.

Brown AM(1), Wright KL, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill 27599-7295.

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II-associated invariant chain (Ii)
gene and the MHC class II molecules are physically and functionally associated
within class II-expressing cell types. These genes are generally co-expressed in 
various cell types and coordinately induced by cytokines such as interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma). Human Ii gene shares a regulatory mechanism with MHC class II genes 
via the X and Y cis-acting elements. Ii X and Y are required for constitutive
expression in B lymphoid cell lines and for induction by IFN-gamma in a
glioblastoma cell line. The Servenius element (S) contributes 5-fold
transcriptional activity to class II gene HLA-DRA, and an S homologue has been
implied in Ii gene regulation. Now we report that along with X and Y, the Ii S
box functions in a positive manner to regulate Ii transcription in B cell lines
but not in T cell lines. In addition, S,X, and Y are all necessary for induced
expression of Ii in an IFN-gamma-regulated glioblastoma cell line and in primary 
untransformed glial cells. Transcriptional activity of Ii X and Y elements
correlates with the presence of in vivo protein/DNA interactions in Ii-expressing
cells. Most interestingly, in vivo interactions are induced upon IFN-gamma
induction in a time-dependent fashion. Thus, the Ii promoter contains elements
that coordinately regulate expression with the MHC class II genes, and these
functional sites are contacted in vivo emphasizing their importance in Ii gene
transcription.


PMID: 8253755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

