
1. J Clin Invest. 1994 Jan;93(1):114-20.

Inhibition of endotoxin-induced activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis by
pentoxifylline or by a monoclonal anti-tissue factor antibody in chimpanzees.

Levi M(1), ten Cate H, Bauer KA, van der Poll T, Edgington TS, BÃ¼ller HR, van
Deventer SJ, Hack CE, ten Cate JW, Rosenberg RD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hemostasis, Thrombosis, Atherosclerosis and Inflammation Research, 
Academic Medical Center F4-237, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Knowledge of the pathogenetic mechanisms responsible for the activation of the
coagulation system associated with endotoxemia is important for the development
of improved modalities for prevention and treatment. We analyzed the appearance
in plasma of TNF, IL-6, and indices of coagulation and fibrinolytic system
activation in normal chimpanzees after intravenous infusion of endotoxin.
Endotoxin infusion elicited reproducible and dose-dependent elevations in serum
TNF and IL-6, as well as marked increases in thrombin generation in vivo as
measured by immunoassays for prothrombin activation fragment F1 + 2,
thrombin-antithrombin III complexes, and fibrinopeptide A. Activation of the
fibrinolytic mechanism was monitored with assays for plasminogen activator
activity and plasmin-alpha 2-antiplasmin complexes. To potentially intervene in
the molecular pathways elicited by endotoxin, pentoxifylline, an agent that
interrupts "immediate early" gene activation by monocytes, or a potent monoclonal
antibody that neutralizes tissue factor-mediated initiation of coagulation, were 
infused shortly before endotoxin. Pentoxifylline markedly inhibited increases in 
the levels of TNF and IL-6, as well as the effects on coagulation and
fibrinolysis. In contrast, the monoclonal antibody to tissue factor completely
abrogated the augmentation in thrombin generation, but had no effect on cytokine 
levels or fibrinolysis. We conclude that the endotoxin-induced activation of
coagulation appears to be mediated by the tissue factor-dependent pathway, the
fibrinolytic response triggered by endotoxin is not dependent on the generation
of thrombin, and that the release of cytokines may be important in mediating the 
activation of both the coagulation and the fibrinolytic mechanisms in vivo.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI116934 
PMCID: PMC293743
PMID: 8282778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

