
1. Tissue Antigens. 1993 Sep;42(3):125-32.

Modulation of cell surface antigens and regulation of phagocytic activity
mediated by CD11b in the monocyte-like cell line U937 in response to
lipopolysaccharide.

Ikewaki N(1), Tamauchi H, Inoko H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kitasato University School of Nursing, Japan.

Modulation of the cellular antigens and regulation of the phagocytic activity of 
the monocyte-like cell line U937 after culture with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were
investigated. CD14 expression was induced on the surface of the U937 cells after 
48 h of culture with LPS and then they became adhesive with numerous filamentous 
filopodia extruded on the cell surface, exhibiting the enhanced expression of
CD16 and CD23, the activation cell surface markers for differentiation into
macrophage. However, no induction or enhancement of the cell surface expression
was observed with respect to CD11b, CD18, HLA-A, B, C, HLA-DR, DQ, DP or CD57.
These U937 cells also acquired the ability to produce superoxide anions and to
phagocytose the Salmonella enteritidis strain, 116-54. This phagocytosis was
inhibited by the anti-CD11b monoclonal antibodies, but not by the anti-CD14,
anti-CD16, anti-CD18, anti-CD23, anti-HLA-A, B, C or anti-HLA-DR monoclonal
antibodies. These findings indicate that the phagocytic activity against
Salmonella enteritidis 116-54 induced by LPS is mediated mainly via the CD11b
molecule, but is not associated with the increased expression of CD11b. Puromycin
and cycloheximide, inhibitors of protein synthesis, or a divalent
cation-chelating agent, EDTA completely inhibited this phagocytic activity.
Interestingly, EDTA was found to suppress specifically the CD11b expression on
the U937 cells cultured with LPS. No phagocytic activity was induced when the
U937 cells cultured with LPS were incubated at 4 degrees C, but restored to the
control level when shifted up to 37 degrees C.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.1993.tb02178.x 
PMID: 8284785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

