
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Feb 1;91(3):1004-8.

Identification of the MAGE-1 gene product by monoclonal and polyclonal
antibodies.

Chen YT(1), Stockert E, Chen Y, Garin-Chesa P, Rettig WJ, van der Bruggen P, Boon
T, Old LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, New York Unit, NY.

The human MAGE-1 gene encodes a melanoma peptide antigen recognized by autologous
cytotoxic T lymphocytes. To produce antibodies against the MAGE-1 gene product,
several approaches were taken. Three oligopeptides were synthesized based on
predicted MAGE-1 amino acid sequences and were used to generate rabbit
anti-peptide anti-sera. In addition, a truncated MAGE-1 cDNA was cloned into an
Escherichia coli expression vector, and recombinant protein was produced and
purified. All three rabbit anti-peptide antisera showed reactivity against the
immunizing peptide, and one reacted with the recombinant MAGE-1 protein by
immunoblotting, but none reacted with cell lysates from MAGE-1 mRNA-positive
cells. The recombinant MAGE-1 protein was then used for the generation of mouse
monoclonal and rabbit polyclonal antibodies. One IgG1 monoclonal antibody, MA454,
as well as rabbit polyclonal antisera recognized a 46-kDa protein in extracts of 
MAGE-1 mRNA-positive melanoma cell lines. The antibodies showed no apparent
cross-reactivity with products of the closely related MAGE-2 and MAGE-3 genes.
Serological typing of normal and tumor cell lysates was in full agreement with
mRNA analysis, showing expression of MAGE-1 protein in MAGE-1 mRNA-positive
testis and a subset of melanomas but not in MAGE-1 mRNA-negative normal or tumor 
tissues. Transfection of the MAGE-1 gene into a MAGE-1 mRNA-negative melanoma
cell line resulted in the expression of the 46-kDa protein, confirming the
identity of this protein as the MAGE-1 gene product.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.3.1004 
PMCID: PMC521442
PMID: 8302824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

