
1. J Immunol. 1993 Jul 1;151(1):389-96.

Adenosine and a related carbocyclic nucleoside analogue selectively inhibit tumor
necrosis factor-alpha production and protect mice against endotoxin challenge.

Parmely MJ(1), Zhou WW, Edwards CK 3rd, Borcherding DR, Silverstein R, Morrison
DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics, and Immunology, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City 66160-7420.

Adenosine (ADO) and its structurally related analogues are known to regulate the 
activities of immune and inflammatory cells, including a number of key functions 
of mononuclear phagocytes. In this study ADO and the synthetic ADO analogue
MDL201112 inhibited TNF-alpha, but not IL-1, production by activated mouse
peritoneal macrophages and the macrophage-like cell lines J774 and RAW-264.
Northern blot analysis indicated that MDL201112 selectively inhibited the
expression of steady-state TNF-alpha RNA in LPS+IFN-gamma-activated J774 and
RAW-264 cells. This effect could not be attributed to changes in TNF-alpha RNA
stability. In contrast, ADO had no effect on RNA levels for TNF-alpha and IL-1,
suggesting that ADO acts at a post-transcriptional biosynthetic step. To
determine whether either compound inhibited TNF-alpha-mediated inflammatory
responses, mice were treated with ADO or MDL201112 and challenged with a lethal
dose of endotoxic LPS and D-galactosamine, an hepatotoxin that sensitizes mice to
lethal LPS challenge. A single i.p. injection of MDL201112 (100 mg/kg) protected 
over 90% of the mice, whether injected 1 h before or at the time of LPS
challenge. MDL201112 also inhibited the appearance of TNF-alpha in the serum of
LPS-challenged animals. The compound did not block D-galactosamine sensitization 
nor did it prevent lethality caused by the injection of rTNF-alpha. ADO failed to
protect animals against endotoxin lethality, most likely due to the rapid
metabolism of the nucleoside in vivo. These results establish ADO and MDL201112
as potent inhibitors of TNF-alpha biosynthesis and suggest that MDL201112 or
similar analogues warrant further study as potential agents for the treatment of 
endotoxin shock and other diseases in which TNF-alpha plays an important
pathogenic role.


PMID: 8326132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

