
1. J Immunol. 1993 Aug 15;151(4):2318-25.

Pentoxifylline attenuates neutrophil activation in experimental endotoxemia in
chimpanzees.

van Leenen D(1), van der Poll T, Levi M, ten Cate H, van Deventer SJ, Hack CE,
Aarden LA, ten Cate JW.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Hemostasis, Thrombosis, Atherosclerosis and Inflammation Research,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Costimulation of neutrophils and cytokines may play an important role in organ
injury in sepsis. Pentoxifylline inhibits various neutrophil functions in vitro, 
and attenuates endotoxin-induced production of TNF in both in vitro and in vivo
models. To assess the effect of pentoxifylline on neutrophil activation in
endotoxemia, nine adult chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) were i.v. injected with
saline (n = 2), Escherichia coli endotoxin (4 ng/kg; n = 4), or E. coli endotoxin
(4 ng/kg) in combination with pentoxifylline (500 mg/3 h, starting 30 min before 
the endotoxin injection; n = 3). Serial blood samples were obtained for
measurements of leukocyte counts and the granulocytic proteinases elastase
complexed with alpha 1-antitrypsin and lactoferrin, and cytokines during the next
5 h. No changes were observed in the saline-treated chimpanzees. Endotoxin
induced a marked leukocytosis and neutrophilia, which were slightly reduced by
pentoxifylline. In contrast, pentoxifylline almost completely prevented
endotoxin-induced neutrophil degranulation: peak elastase-alpha 1-antitrypsin was
164 +/- 21 ng/ml (mean +/- SE) after endotoxin alone, vs 71 +/- 7 ng/ml after
endotoxin with pentoxifylline (t = 3 h; p < 0.05); peak lactoferrin was 329 +/-
15 and 182 +/- 5 ng/ml, respectively (t = 5 h; p < 0.05). Pentoxifylline also
inhibited the endotoxin-induced release of TNF (271 +/- 26 vs 55 +/- 23 pg/ml at 
t = 1.5 h; p < 0.05) and IL-6 (225 +/- 42 vs 73 +/- 25 pg/ml at t = 2 h; p <
0.05). IL-8 release was not significantly inhibited by pentoxifylline. In none of
the animals activation of the C system could be detected. We conclude that
pentoxifylline attenuates neutrophil activation in endotoxemia in chimpanzees,
probably in part by inhibiting the release of TNF.


PMID: 8345209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

