
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Sep;13(9):5620-8.

A heterodimer of HEB and an E12-related protein interacts with the CD4 enhancer
and regulates its activity in T-cell lines.

Sawada S(1), Littman DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco 94143-0414.

A T-lymphocyte-specific enhancer located 13 kb upstream of the murine CD4 gene
was recently shown to be required for the developmentally regulated expression of
CD4. We have previously identified three nuclear protein binding sites in this
enhancer; one of these sites, CD4-3, is essential for expression and contains two
E-box core motifs (CANNTG) adjacent to each other in the sequence
TAACAGGTGTCAGCTGGT. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays using the CD4-3
oligonucleotide as a probe, three nuclear protein complexes, termed CD4-3A, -B,
and -C, were detected with nuclear extracts from T-cell lines. CD4-3A, which
involves nuclear protein binding to the 5' E-box, was detected only with nuclear 
extracts from lymphoid cells. Specific antisera were used to show that the CD4-3A
complex contains a heterodimer or heterooligomer of basic helix-loop-helix
transcriptional factors, E12 or a related factor and HEB, which is expressed
predominantly in thymus. Consistent with this finding, in vitro-translated E12
and HEB proteins, as homodimers or heterodimers, bound preferentially to the 5'
E-box. Point mutations in the 5' E-box, but not in the 3' E-box, abolished CD4
enhancer activity. Furthermore, overexpression of Id, a protein that forms
inactive heterodimers with E12/E47, blocked CD4 enhancer activity in T cells.
These results suggest that a heterodimer composed of HEB and E12 or a closely
related protein plays a critical role in CD4 enhancer function by interacting
with the 5' E-box motif of the CD4-3 site in vivo.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.13.9.5620 
PMCID: PMC360288
PMID: 8355705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

