
1. Anaesthesist. 1993 Aug;42(8):509-15.

[The effect of different autotransfusion procedures on the antibiotic picture. A 
study on cephalosporin cefamandole].

[Article in German]

Menges T(1), Boldt J, Scholz K, Wagner RM, Ruwoldt R, Welters I, Hempelmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Anaesthesiologie und Operative Intensivmedizin, Klinikum der
Justus-Liebig-Universit√§t Giessen.

Infection after open heart surgery is a serious complication since eradication of
infection in these cases is difficult even with appropriate antibiotic therapy.
In the attempt to avoid this problem, prophylactic administration of antibiotics 
is common. Their relative safety and their broad spectrum of activity make
cephalosporin antibiotics popular choices for prophylaxis prior to and during
operations, including cardiovascular procedures. METHODS. Preoperative antibiotic
prophylaxis with 2 g cefamandole was performed in a prospective randomized study 
including 62 male patients divided into three groups. All patients gave informed 
consent, and the study was approved by the ethics committee of the hospital.
Patients in group 1 (n = 21) and group 2 (n = 21) underwent aortocoronary bypass 
(ACVB) with extracorporeal circulation (ECC), while patients in group 3 (n = 20) 
had carotid surgery. Anaesthesia, coronary-bypass procedures and infusion regime 
were standardized. The flow rate during ECC was maintained at 2.41/min/m2 and the
rectal temperature between 33 degrees and 34 degrees C. Arterial and urine
specimens for the determination of plasma and urine levels of cefamandole were
taken at definite times. Autologous blood salvage during operation was performed 
with haemofiltration techniques (HF) in group 1 (HF 80, Fresenius, Bad Homburg,
Germany) and with cell separation techniques (CS) in group 2 (Hemonetics III,
Hemonetics). Plasma and urine cefamandole levels were measured by high-pressure
liquid chromatography (HPLC). RESULTS. After administration of 2 g cefamandole
mean peak levels of 404.6 +/- 141.7 micrograms/ml were seen. Because of
haemodilution at the beginning of extracorporeal circulation, group 1 and 2
showed much lower cefamandole plasma levels, 22.1 +/- 11.6 micrograms/ml and 24.3
+/- 14.4 micrograms/ml, than group 3 (after the same time course), with 47.4 +/- 
19.1 micrograms/ml. For all patients in group 1 and 2 prebypass time (70.3 +/-
22.4 min) and the duration of the ECC (72.3 +/- 17.7 min) were comparable. There 
was a significant correlation between prebypass time and cefamandole plasma
levels at the beginning of extracorporeal circulation (P < 0.001). No correlation
could be seen for the plasma concentration after discontinuation of the
extracorporeal circulation and the duration of extracorporeal circulation. The
volume of autologous red packed cells and the enclosed amount of cefamandole
showed a significant difference (P < 0.001) between group 1 (1120.0 +/- 296.8 ml,
27.5 +/- 17.1 mg) and group 2 (734.3 +/- 186.6 ml, 2.9 +/- 3.2 mg). The plasma
cefamandole level after transfusion of autologous blood displayed a significant
correlation (p < 0.01) with cefamandole concentration in the autologous red
packed cells. Transfusion of the autologous blood produced no significant
increase in plasma cefamandole levels. With an operation time of more than 2.5 h 
during ECC the cefamandole plasma level decreased below the necessary minimal
inhibitory concentration (MIC90), particularly for gram-negative bacteria.
CONCLUSION. Additional administration of 1 g cefamandole shortly before the
beginning of cardiopulmonary bypass is recommended, particularly for surgical
procedures with ECC of more than 2.5 h. Adjustment of drug dosage prior to or
during surgery may be required to optimize therapy, but before this can be
achieved precisely, more information on drug disposition during the operative
procedures is needed.


PMID: 8368471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

