
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1993 Aug;31(8):2031-7.

Escherichia coli strains involved in diarrhea in France: high prevalence and
heterogeneity of diffusely adhering strains.

Jallat C(1), Livrelli V, Darfeuille-Michaud A, Rich C, Joly B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Faculté de Pharmacie, Clermont-Ferrand, France.

Two hundred sixty-two strains of Escherichia coli isolated from diarrheal stool
specimens from infants, children, and adults hospitalized in Clermont-Ferrand,
France, were studied to classify them in the previously described pathogenic
groups of E. coli involved in diarrheal diseases. A total of 1.5% of them
belonged to the enterotoxigenic E. coli pathotype, but none belonged to the
enteroinvasive E. coli, enterohemorrhagic E. coli, or enteropathogenic E. coli
pathotypes. Seventeen strains (6.5%) exhibited an aggregative pattern of adhesion
to HEp-2 cells (EAggEC pathotype), but of these, three (17.6%) did not hybridize 
with the EAggEC DNA probe. Most of the strains involved in diarrhea belonged to
the diffusely adhering E. coli group; 100 strains (38.2%) exhibited a diffuse
adhesion (DA) to HEp-2 cells. Only eight strains (8.9%) from controls diffusely
adhered to HEp-2 cells. The highly significant difference (P < 0.0001) between DA
strains from patients and from controls suggests that the diffusely adhering E.
coli strains should be considered pathogens. Only 33 of them (33%) hybridized
with the previously described DA DNA probe, and only 2 (2%) hybridized with the
AIDA DNA probe. Four different major proteins were observed in the bacterial
surface extracts of the 33 strains positive with the DA DNA probe. In addition,
16 strains that diffusely adhered to HEp-2 cells induced a cytotoxic effect on
HEp-2 cells that was characterized by pyknosis and lysis of the cytoplasmic
membrane. This cytotoxic effect was correlated with the synthesis of a hemolysin.
The genes involved in diffuse adhesion to HEp-2 cells were located on conjugative
R plasmids in strains that did not hybridize with the DA or AIDA DNA probes.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.31.8.2031-2037.1993 
PMCID: PMC265691
PMID: 8370727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

