
1. Infect Immun. 1993 Oct;61(10):4293-301.

Activation of the complement system in baboons challenged with live Escherichia
coli: correlation with mortality and evidence for a biphasic activation pattern.

de Boer JP(1), Creasey AA, Chang A, Roem D, Eerenberg AJ, Hack CE, Taylor FB Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory of the Netherlands Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service,
Amsterdam.

Activation of the complement system was studied in baboons that were challenged
with live Escherichia coli. In the group challenged with a lethal dose (n = 4),
the complement activation parameters C3b/c, C4b/c, and C5b-9 increased 13, 5, and
12 times the baseline value, respectively, during the first 6 h after the E. coli
infusion, whereas in the group challenged with a sublethal dose (n = 10), they
increased only moderately, by 2 to 3 times the baseline value. However, in this
latter group, a more pronounced activation occurred at 24 h. Subsequent
experiments showed that this second phase in complement activation started at 6 h
after the challenge, at which time infused microorganisms had been cleared from
the circulation. The simultaneous increase in C-reactive protein with this second
phase suggested an endogenous activation mechanism involving this acute-phase
protein. Levels of inactivated (modified) C1 inhibitor also increased in both
groups, with peak levels of 2.5 times the baseline value at 24 h in the sublethal
group and of 4 times at 6 h after the challenge in the lethal group. Thus,
activation of complement in this animal model for sepsis occurs in a biphasic
pattern, the initial phase mediated by the bacteria and the later phase mediated 
by an endogenous mechanism possibly involving C-reactive protein. The differences
in complement activation between animals with lethal or sublethal sepsis support 
the hypothesis that complement activation contributes to the lethal complications
of sepsis.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.61.10.4293-4301.1993 
PMCID: PMC281157
PMID: 8406818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

