
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Oct 1;90(19):8987-91.

Activation and differentiation requirements of primary T cells in vitro.

Sagerstr√∂m CG(1), Kerr EM, Allison JP, Davis MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, CA 94305-5428.

The progression of T cells from a quiescent or resting state to fully activated, 
proliferating cells is a crucial step in the initiation of an immune response. We
have developed an in vitro system to study the requirements for triggering or
hindering this pathway by using naive T cells derived from T-cell antigen
receptor alpha beta transgenic animals and peptide-major histocompatibility (MHC)
complexes coated on plates. Whereas previously stimulated T cells require only
peptide-MHC complexes to produce interleukin 2 (IL-2), naive cells require at
least one additional signal, which can be provided by either an anti-CD28
antibody or the protein kinase C stimulant phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate. In
contrast, the anti-CD28 antibody augments IL-2 production by primed T cells but
is not required, and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate has no discernable effect.
Thus we find that native T cells have significantly more stringent requirements
for IL-2 production than primed cells and that this fits well with previous
observations in other in vitro systems as well as in vivo models of autoimmunity.
We also find that peptide-MHC complex stimulation of naive T cells, together with
exogenous IL-2, is sufficient to convert these cells to primed T cells in vitro
in 2 days, as assayed both by surface marker analysis and stimulation
requirements. Taken together with the above results, this suggests that the
activation of primary T cells requires at least two signals and that IL-2
produced by naive T cells in vivo may act in an autocrine fashion to allow them
to proliferate and differentiate.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.19.8987 
PMCID: PMC47486
PMID: 8415642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

