
1. Mol Immunol. 1993 Feb;30(3):287-300.

Serological and molecular characterization of mouse anti-idiotypic monoclonal
antibodies elicited with the syngeneic anti-HLA-A2,28 monoclonal antibody
CR11-351.

Armandola EA(1), Mariani SM, Ferrone S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla 
10595.

The molecular basis of the differential specificity of seven mouse anti-id mAb
elicited with the syngeneic anti-HLA-A2,28 mAb CR11-351 was analyzed by comparing
their specificity with their heavy and light chain variable region sequences. Of 
the six mAb recognizing idiotopes within the antigen combining site of mAb
CR11-351, mAb T10-352, T10-440 and T10-505 recognize the same (or spatially
close) idiotope(s) since they cross-inhibit each other in their binding to mAb
CR11-351 and elicit syngeneic anti-anti-id antibodies with similar specificity.
On the other hand, mAb T10-421, T10-649 and T10-938 appear to recognize spatially
close but distinct idiotopes since they cross-inhibit each other, but elicit
anti-anti-id antibodies which inhibit only the binding of the respective
immunizing anti-id mAb to mAb CR11-351. mAb T8-203 is the only anti-id mAb which 
recognizes an idiotope outside the antigen combining site of mAb CR11-351 since
it does not inhibit the binding of the latter to target cells and binds to mAb
CR11-351 coated B lymphoid cells. In addition, mAb T8-203 defines an idiotope
which is shared by seven anti-HLA mAb, while the remaining six anti-id mAb
recognize idiotopes which are not detectable on the panel of anti-HLA mAb. mAb
T10-352, T10-440 and T10-505 are highly homologous in their VH and VL regions and
in their V(D)J junctions suggesting that they may be clonally related. On the
other hand, mAb T8-203, T10-649 and T10-938 share some degree of homology in
their VH region as all of them use J558 VH genes but differ considerably in their
VL regions. Finally, mAb T10-421 is the most unrelated mAb as it utilizes VH, D, 
JH, VK and JK gene segments different from those of all the other anti-id mAb.
These findings indicate that in the HLA-A antigenic system defined by mAb
CR11-351 the main mechanism underlying the differential target specificity of
syngeneic anti-id mAb is the combinatorial diversity together with the
differential pairing of heavy and light chains.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(93)90057-i 
PMID: 8433707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

