
1. Br J Dermatol. 1993 May;128(5):493-9.

Group A streptococcal antigen-specific T lymphocytes in guttate psoriatic
lesions.

Baker BS(1), Bokth S, Powles A, Garioch JJ, Lewis H, Valdimarsson H, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London, U.K.

A strong association exists between guttate psoriasis and group A,
beta-haemolytic streptococcal infections. To demonstrate the presence of
streptococcal-specific T cells in psoriatic skin, T-cell lines (TLs) were
established from biopsies of lesions from five patients with guttate psoriasis,
and compared with TLs from five patients with eczema, five with lichen planus,
two with pityriasis rosea and three with nickel contact dermatitis. TLs from
purified protein derivative (PPD)-induced delayed hypersensitivity sites in three
normal individuals were also studied. All five of the psoriatic TLs responded in 
a proliferation assay to heat-killed isolates of group A streptococci, compared
with only one eczema, two lichen planus and one pityriasis rosea. The response of
one nickel contact dermatitis and two PPD TLs to group A streptococci was
markedly less than to nickel and PPD, respectively. One of the psoriatic TLs was 
cloned in the presence of type 5 streptococcal M protein. The nine clones
obtained were all CD3+, CD4+, CD45RO+, TCR alpha, beta+, gamma, delta-. However, 
they were all unreactive with antibodies to TCR V beta 5, 6, 8 or 12. Eight of
the nine clones reacted, to a varying extent, to one or two of three preparations
of group A streptococci expressing different M proteins. The streptococcal
response of four consistently reactive clones from this patient was
HLA-DR-restricted and inhibited by anti-HLA-DR antibody in a dose-dependent
manner. On stimulation these four clones secreted high levels of gamma-interferon
and detectable levels of IL-2, IL-10 and granulocyte/macrophage colony
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) depending upon the nature of the stimulus, but no
IL-4 or TNF-alpha production was detected. This study has demonstrated, for the
first time, that T lymphocytes specific for group A streptococcal antigens can be
consistently isolated from guttate psoriatic lesions. The role of
streptococcal-specific T cells in the pathogenesis of psoriasis remains to be
determined.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.1993.tb00224.x 
PMID: 8504038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

