
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Dec;15(12):6820-8.

CD28-mediated costimulation in the absence of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
association and activation.

Crooks ME(1), Littman DR, Carter RH, Fearon DT, Weiss A, Stein PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco 94143, USA.

T-cell activation involves two distinct signal transduction pathways.
Antigen-specific signaling events are initiated by T-cell receptor recognition of
cognate peptide presented by major histocompatibility complex molecules.
Costimulatory signals, which are required for optimal T-cell activation and for
overcoming the induction of anergy, can be provided by the homodimeric T-cell
glycoprotein CD28 through its interaction with the counterreceptors B7-1 and B7-2
on antigen-presenting cells. Ligation of CD28 results in its phosphorylation on
tyrosines and the subsequent recruitment and activation of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI 3-kinase). It has been suggested that the induced association of
CD28 and PI 3-kinase is required for costimulation. We report here that ligation 
of CD19, a heterologous B-cell receptor that also associates with and activates
PI 3-kinase upon ligation, failed to costimulate interleukin-2 production.
Moreover, pharmacological inhibition of PI 3-kinase activity failed to block
costimulation mediated by CD28. By mutational analysis, we demonstrate that
disruption of PI 3-kinase association with CD28 also did not abrogate
costimulation. These results argue that PI 3-kinase association with CD28 is
neither necessary nor sufficient for costimulation of interleukin-2 production.
Finally, we identify specific amino acid residues required for CD28-mediated
costimulatory activity.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.15.12.6820 
PMCID: PMC230936
PMID: 8524248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

