
1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 12;271(2):631-4.

Persistent activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1) in gamma
radiation-induced apoptosis.

Chen YR(1), Meyer CF, Tan TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) are activated by various stimuli, including UV
light, interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and CD28
costimulation. Induction of JNK by TNF-alpha, a strong apoptosis inducer, implies
a possible role of JNK in the regulation of programmed cell death. Present
studies show that lethal doses of gamma radiation (GR) induced JNK activities at 
the early phase of apoptosis in Jurkat T-cells. We demonstrate that JNK1 was
activated by either the T-cell activation signals, anti-CD28 monoclonal antibody 
plus phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), or the apoptosis-inducing treatment, 
GR; however, the induction patterns were different. In contrast to the rapid and 
transient JNK1 activation caused by CD28 signaling plus PMA, GR induced a delayed
and persistent JNK1 activation. This implies a distinct regulatory mechanism and 
specific function of JNK1 in irradiated cells. The nuclear and cytosolic JNK1
activities were simultaneously increased in the irradiated cells without an
evident change in the protein levels. The abilities of GR to induce JNK1
activation and DNA fragmentation were correlated. Peripheral blood lymphocytes
were more sensitive to GR than Jurkat cells in JNK1 induction. The responsiveness
of JNK1 to GR suggests the involvement of JNK1 in the initiation of the apoptosis
process.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.2.631 
PMID: 8557665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

