
1. Blood. 1996 Feb 1;87(3):956-67.

Modulation of hematopoiesis in mice with a truncated mutant of the interleukin-2 
receptor gamma chain.

Ohbo K(1), Suda T, Hashiyama M, Mantani A, Ikebe M, Miyakawa K, Moriyama M,
Nakamura M, Katsuki M, Takahashi K, Yamamura K, Sugamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan.

The interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor gamma chain is indispensable for IL-2-, IL-4-, 
IL-7-, IL-9-, and IL-15-mediated signaling. Mutations of the human gamma chain
cause the X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (XSCID), showing that T and
natural killer cells absolutely require the gamma chain for their development in 
humans. To elucidate the roles of the gamma chain in hematopoiesis, we have
generated mice, by gene targeting, that express a form of the gamma chain lacking
the cytoplasmic region. Male mice carrying the truncated gamma-chain mutant,
which mimics mutations in patients with XSCID, showed a decrease in the number of
lymphocytes and an increase in monocytes; the number of T cells was profoundly
reduced and no natural killer cells were detected, which is similar to the
characteristic of human XSCID. Unlike human XSCID, the levels of B cells were
also reduced. In spite of the severe decrease in CD45R+/sIgM+ B cells, the level 
of IgM in serum of the 8-week-old mutant mice was higher than that of control
littermates. Interestingly, the stem cell population with surface phenotypes of
CD34, c-kit, and Sca-1 was significantly increased. Furthermore, the
colony-forming assay showed that the mutant mice had 15-fold higher numbers of
hematopoietic progenitor cells in the spleen as compared with that of controls.
These results indicate that functional loss of the gamma chain causes significant
effects on the immunological system in mice.


PMID: 8562967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

