
1. Int Immunol. 1995 Nov;7(11):1779-86.

CD44 plays a co-stimulatory role in murine T cell activation: ligation of CD44
selectively co-stimulates IL-2 production, but not proliferation in
TCR-stimulated murine Th1 cells.

Sommer F(1), Huber M, Röllinghoff M, Lohoff M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Microbiology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

The murine CD44 receptor family is thought to be involved in a variety of
lymphocyte functions, including lymphopoesis, lymphocyte homing and cell
migration. Herein, we show that murine CD44 also plays a role as a co-stimulatory
molecule for the activation of CD4+ T cells. Ligation of CD44 by mAb enhanced
IL-2 production of long-term cultured, anti-CD3-stimulated Th1 cell lines.
Moreover, anti-CD44 mAb synergized with anti-CD28 mAb in exerting this effect. A 
synergism of anti-CD28 and anti-CD44 mAb to co-stimulate IL-2 production was also
observed in anti-CD3-triggered, freshly isolated splenic CD4+ T cells. Blocking
experiments with cyclosporin A indicated that the intracellular pathways used by 
the CD28 and CD44 molecules appear to be different. In contrast to the effects on
the IL-2 production of Th1 cells, neither anti-CD44 mAb alone nor the combination
of anti-CD44 with anti-CD28 were able to induce proliferation of
anti-CD3-triggered Th1 cells. In accordance, triggering of CD44 and/or CD28 by
mAb was not sufficient to reverse the previously described 'proliferative block'.
This term describes the unresponsiveness of Th1 cells against IL-2, which occurs 
when Th1 cells are triggered by anti-CD3 in the absence of co-signals. These data
lead us to propose a model of Th1 cell activation which includes two functionally
different types of co-signals: one for IL-2 production and a separate one for
proliferation.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/7.11.1779 
PMID: 8580076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

