
1. Int Immunol. 1995 Nov;7(11):1787-98.

A radiosensitive APC activity dissociates IL-2 secretion and activation-induced
cell death by autoreactive T cell hybridomas.

Prasad SA(1), Fling SP, Gregerson DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

T cell hybridomas were generated from a LEW rat T cell line specific for the
uveitogenic peptide bov-B1 of bovine retinal S-antigen. Using these autoreactive 
hybridomas, IL-2 production and activation-induced cell death (AICD) were
dissociated as outcomes of activation. The self-reactive hybridomas secrete IL-2 
and undergo AICD in response to antigen presented by non-irradiated syngeneic
splenocytes, whereas antigen presentation by irradiated splenocytes induced only 
AICD. IL-2 production by a non-self reactive hybridoma was unaffected by
irradiation of the APC. Pretreatment of the APC with phorbol ester or
lipopolysaccharide and IL-4 protected their ability to induce IL-2 secretion
after gamma-irradiation. Although the co-stimulation-blocking reagent CTLA-4-Ig
mimicked the effect of gamma-irradiation by preventing IL-2 secretion but not
AICD, B7 expression on the APC was not radiosensitive, nor did co-stimulation,
provided 'in trans' with a B7-expressing third-party cell, reconstitute
antigen-specific hybridoma IL-2 secretion in response to irradiated APC. In
summary, the data show that IL-2 secretion and AICD of a self-reactive T cell
hybridoma can be dissociated as consequences of TCR occupancy in the presence of 
a functional co-stimulatory signal. It is proposed that the signals producing
these events are transduced through the TCR-CD3 complex alone and reflect the
differential outcomes of high- and low-affinity interactions.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/7.11.1787 
PMID: 8580077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

