
1. Yeast. 1995 Nov;11(14):1367-80.

Further definition of the sequence and position requirements of the arginine
control element that mediates repression and induction by arginine in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Crabeel M(1), de Rijcke M, Seneca S, Heimberg H, Pfeiffer I, Matisova A.

Author information: 
(1)Erfelijkheidsleer en Microbiologie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel and
Onderzoekingsinstituut CERIA-COOVI, Belgium.

Repression or induction of the genes involved in arginine biosynthesis or
catabolism, respectively, both require participation of the ArgRp/Mcm1p
regulatory complex. Our previous work showed that those opposite effects were
mediated by a similar arginine-responsive element of 23 nucleotides (that we now 
call ARC, for ARginine Control) situated close to the start of transcription in
the repressed promoters and far upstream of the TATA-element in the induced
promoters. To define more precisely the sequence and position requirements of the
ARC element, we have now characterized by mutagenesis the promoter elements of
the arginine-repressible ARG1 and ARG8 genes. We also identify a functional ARC
in the CPA1 promoter, thereby confirming, in agreement with our previous mRNA
pulse-labelling data, the participation of a transcriptional component in the
arginine regulation of that gene otherwise submitted to a translational
regulation. From the 12 ARC elements now characterized, we have derived a
consensus sequence and show that such a synthetic element is able to mediate
ArgRp/Mcm1p-dependent arginine regulation. An important new finding illustrated
by ARG1 and CPA1, is that contrary to what all the previous data suggested,
repression can be mediated by ARC elements located far upstream of the TATA-box. 
The new data suggest that the arginine repressor might inhibit transcription in
an active process.

DOI: 10.1002/yea.320111405 
PMID: 8585320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

