
1. Can J Microbiol. 1995 Apr-May;41(4-5):354-65.

Characterization of the pTFI91-family replicon of Thiobacillus ferrooxidans
plasmids.

Chakravarty L(1), Zupancic TJ, Baker B, Kittle JD, Fry IJ, Tuovinen OH.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Science Graduate Program, Ohio State University, Columbus
43210-1086, USA.

Plasmids found in six strains of Thiobacillus ferrooxidans were mapped and
compared in an effort to detect the origin of replication. Four strains yielded
an identical 9.8-kb plasmid, pTFI91. Restriction mapping and Southern blot
hybridization analysis were used to confirm this finding. Dissimilar plasmids
found in two other strains contained a conserved 2.2-kb SacI region common to
pTFI91. DNA sequence analysis of this region showed structural features common to
bacterial plasmid replicons. A comparison of the pTFI91 origin with those of T.
ferrooxidans pTF-FC2 and other broad host range vectors did not show significant 
homologous DNA sequences. To verify the replication function, a chloramphenicol
acetyl transferase marker gene was ligated at the unique sites of pTFI91, and the
plasmid was transformed into Escherichia coli DH5 alpha cells but no
transformants were identified. To test the replication of pTFI91 independent of
DNA polymerase I in E. coli, different restriction fragments of pTFI91 were
cloned into pHSG398 (Cmr, ColEI origin) and transformed into the polA1 mutant
SF800, but chloramphenicol-resistant transformants were not detected.
Electrotransformation of T. ferrooxidans TFI-70 and Pseudomonas putida ATCC 19151
also failed to yield transformants. The results suggested that the pTFI91 plasmid
replicon does not function either in E. coli or in P. putida. Since pTFI91
contains the same origin of replication as other plasmids in several other T.
ferrooxidans strains, this replicon may be commonly distributed in T.
ferrooxidans.

DOI: 10.1139/m95-048 
PMID: 8590413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

