
1. Mol Microbiol. 1995 Oct;18(1):123-33.

Cation-selectivity of the L-glutamate transporters of Escherichia coli, Bacillus 
stearothermophilus and Bacillus caldotenax: dependence on the environment in
which the proteins are expressed.

Tolner B(1), Ubbink-Kok T, Poolman B, Konings WN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences, University of
Groningen, Haren, The Netherlands.

L-Glutamate transport by the H(+)-glutamate and Na(+)-glutamate symport proteins 
of Escherichia coli K-12 (GltPEc and GltSEc, respectively) and the
Na(+)-H(+)-glutamate symport proteins of Bacillus stearothermophilus (GltTBs) and
Bacillus caldotenax (GltTBc) was studied in membrane vesicles derived from cells 
in which the proteins were either homologously or heterologously expressed.
Substrate and inhibitor specificity studies indicate that GltPEc, GltTBs and
GltTBc fall into the same group of transporters, whereas GltSEc is distinctly
different from the others. Also, the cation specificity of GltSEc is different;
GltSEc transported L-glutamate with (at least) two Na+, whereas GltPEc, GltTBs
and GltTBc catalysed an electrogenic symport of L-glutamate with > or = two H+,
i.e. when the proteins were expressed in E. coli. Surprisingly studies in
membrane vesicles of B. stearothermophilus and B. caldotenax indicated a
Na(+)-H(+)-L-glutamate symport for both GltTBs and GltTBc. The Na+ dependency of 
the GltT transporters in the Bacillus strains increased with temperature. These
observations suggest that the conformation of the transport proteins in the E.
coli and the Bacillus membranes differs, which influences the coupling ion
selectivity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1995.mmi_18010123.x 
PMID: 8596452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

