
1. Blood. 1996 Mar 15;87(6):2221-34.

Induction of hematopoietic commitment and erythromyeloid differentiation in
embryonal stem cells constitutively expressing c-myb.

Melotti P(1), Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA USA.

To provide insight into the mechanisms by which c-myb regulates hematopoiesis, we
analyzed the expression of markers for multiple hematopoietic lineages in
differentiating parental embryonic stem (ES) cells and in ES cells transfected
with c-myb or with a mutant c-myb deficient in DNA binding and assessed the
ability of these cells to undergo hematopoietic commitment and colony formation. 
Undifferentiated ES cells transfected with intact c-myb, but not cells
transfected with mutant c-myb, expressed CD34, c-kit, GATA1, and flt3 mRNA as
well as surface CD34, c-kit, and flt3 product. In contrast, the kinetics of
GATA-2 mRNA expression was identical in parental and Myb-transfected ES cells.
Transient expression assays suggested transactivation of gene expression
dependent on interaction with Myb binding sites in the CD34 and GATA1 5' flanking
regions. Undifferentiated parental and c-myb mutant-transfected ES cells were not
clonogenic, whereas c-myb transfectants formed erythromyeloid colonies in
methylcellulose cultures in the absence of added hematopoietic growth factors
and, at higher frequency, in the presence of kit and flt-3 ligands. Colony
formation was suppressed by treatment with antisense oligodeoxynucleotides
specifically downregulating c-kit and flt-3 expression. These findings indicate
that c-myb regulates hematopoietic commitment and progenitor cell proliferation
and differentiation through the activation of certain genes that define the
stem/progenitor cell compartment.


PMID: 8630382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

