
1. Biochemistry. 1996 May 28;35(21):6771-6.

Role of the prodomain in folding and secretion of rat pancreatic carboxypeptidase
A1.

Phillips MA(1), Rutter WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
75235-9041, USA.

Pancreatic carboxypeptidase A1 (CPA1) is synthesized as an inactive precursor,
proCPA1, which is processed to the active enzyme by the proteolytic removal of
the 95-amino acid N-terminal prodomain. Purified rat proCPA1 is renatured in
vitro after denaturation in guanidine or in guanidine plus reducing agents. In
contrast, purified CPA1 is not renatured under any of the conditions tested.
While proCPA1 is secreted in yeast when fused to the alpha-factor signal sequence
in place of its endogenous signal sequence, mature CPA1 is not secreted and is
trapped and degraded intracellularly. Thus, in addition to maintaining CPA1 in
the inactive state, the prodomain promotes folding and secretion of the
proenzyme. Neither of these functions can be restored by supplying the prodomain 
to CPA1 in trans. The three-dimensional structure of porcine proCPA reveals a
number of extensive contacts made between the prodomain and the enzyme active
site which account for its inhibitory properties [Guasch et al. (1992) J. Mol.
Biol. 224, 141-157]. Among these contacts are salt bridges formed between Arg-71 
and Asp-A36 and between Arg-124 and Asp-A89. Mutation of any of these four
residues inhibits secretion of proCPA1 from yeast and results in its
intracellular degradation. The effect of the mutations on secretion suggests that
interactions which stabilize the binding of prodomain to the native enzyme active
site may also be important for the successful folding of proCPA1.

DOI: 10.1021/bi960113o 
PMID: 8639628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

