
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 May 28;93(11):5313-8.

The transcription factors c-myb and GATA-2 act independently in the regulation of
normal hematopoiesis.

Melotti P(1), Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

The transcription factors c-myb and GATA-2 are both required for blood cell
development in vivo and in vitro. However, very little is known on their
mechanism(s) of action and whether they impact on complementary or overlapping
pathways of hematopoietic proliferation and differentiation. We report here that 
embryonic stem (ES) cells transfected with c-myb or GATA-2 cDNAs, individually or
in combination, underwent hematopoietic commitment and differentiation in the
absence of added hematopoietic growth factors but that stimulation with c-kit and
flt-3 ligands enhanced colony formation only in the c-myb transfectants. This
enhancement correlated with c-kit and flt-3 surface receptor up-regulation in
c-myb-(but not GATA-2-) transfected ES cells. Transfection of ES cells with
either a c-myb or a GATA-2 antisense construct abrogated erythromyeloid
colony-forming ability in methyl cellulose; however, introduction of a
full-length GATA-2 or c-myb cDNA, respectively, rescued the
hematopoiesis-deficient phenotype, although only c-myb-rescued ES cells expressed
c-kit and flt-3 surface receptors and formed increased numbers of hematopoietic
colonies upon stimulation with the cognate ligands. These results are in
agreement with previous studies indicating a fundamental role of c-myb and GATA-2
in hematopoiesis. Of greater importance, our studies suggest that GATA-2 and
c-myb exert their roles in hematopoietic gene regulation through distinct
mechanisms of action in nonoverlapping pathways.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.11.5313 
PMCID: PMC39242
PMID: 8643572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

