
1. Anasthesiol Intensivmed Notfallmed Schmerzther. 1996 Mar;31(2):77-84.

[Mechanical autotransfusion also in transurethral resection of prostatic adenoma?
Studies of preserved washed erythrocyte concentrates before possible
retransfusion].

[Article in German]

Tumbass VE(1), Schmitt Y, Schöter G, Henn-Beilharz A, Krier C.

Author information: 
(1)Anästhesieabteilung Kreiskrankenhaus Bad Urach.

AIM: Does cell-saving during transurethral resection of prostatic adenoma (TURP) 
provide autologous washed erythrocyte concentrates (AWECs) of the same
haematological and bacteriological quality as that of established indications of 
a cell-saving device? Should the cell-saving device be used routinely in TURP?
METHODS: 37 patients underwent TURP with written, informed consent. All patients 
had antibiotic therapy prior to surgery. Shed blood was processed by a
cell-saving device. AWECs specimens were analysed for red blood count,
electrolytes, LDH, extracellular haemoglobin, osmotic fragility, blood culture
and bacterial concentration. In addition, data of urine cultures, adenoma
cultures and adenoma histology were analysed. AWEcs were not retransfused.
RESULTS: Haematological quality was shown to be comparable to that of established
applications of a cell-saving device. However, 82% of the AWECs were contaminated
with bacteria. Concentrations were as high as > 10(6) bacteria/ml. Isolated
bacteria ranged from e. coli and pseudomonas to staphylococci, streptococci and
candidae. Bacteria found in the urine cultures of patients with urinary tract
infections could also be isolated in their AWECs. 16% of the patients had
prostatic cancer not know preoperatively. Mass of resected adenoma and volume of 
AWEC did not correlate.
CONCLUSIONS: In despite of good haematological quality we considered the rate of 
82% bacterial and 16% tumour cell contamination of the AWECs unacceptable and,
contrary to some literature data, we no longer use a cell-saving device in TURP.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-995876 
PMID: 8652768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

