
1. J Bacteriol. 1996 Jun;178(11):3015-24.

Cloning, sequencing, and expression of clustered genes encoding
beta-hydroxybutyryl-coenzyme A (CoA) dehydrogenase, crotonase, and butyryl-CoA
dehydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824.

Boynton ZL(1), Bennet GN, Rudolph FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, The Institute of Biosciences and 
Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005-1892, USA.

The enzymes beta-hydroxybutyryl-coenzyme A (CoA) dehydrogenase (BHBD), crotonase,
and butyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (BCD) from Clostridium acetobutylicum are
responsible for the formation of butyryl-CoA from acetoacetyl-CoA. These enzymes 
are essential to both acid formation and solvent formation by clostridia.
Clustered genes encoding BHBD, crotonase, BCD, and putative electron transfer
flavoprotein alpha and beta subunits have been cloned and sequenced. The
nucleotide sequence of the crt gene indicates that it encodes crotonase, a
protein with 261 amino acid residues and a calculated molecular mass of 28.2 kDa;
the hbd gene encodes BHBD, with 282 residues and a molecular mass of 30.5 kDa.
Three open reading frames (bcd, etfB, and etfA) are located between crt and hbd. 
The nucleotide sequence of bcd indicates that it encodes BCD, which consists of
379 amino acid residues and has high levels of homology with various acyl-CoA
dehydrogenases. Open reading frames etfB and etfA, located downstream of bcd,
encode 27.2- and 36.1-kDa proteins, respectively, and show homology with the
fixAB genes and the alpha and beta subunits of the electron transfer
flavoprotein. These findings suggest that BCD in clostridia might interact with
the electron transfer flavoprotein in its redox function. Primer extension
analysis identified a promoter consensus sequence upstream of the crt gene,
suggesting that the clustered genes are transcribed as a transcriptional unit and
form a BCS (butyryl-CoA synthesis) operon. A DNA fragment containing the entire
BCS operon was subcloned into an Escherichia coli-C. acetobutylicum shuttle
vector. Enzyme activity assays showed that crotonase and BHBD were highly
overproduced in cell extracts from E. coli harboring the subclone. In C.
acetobutylicum harboring the subclone, the activities of the enzymes crotonase,
BHBD, and BCD were elevated.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.178.11.3015-3024.1996 
PMCID: PMC178046
PMID: 8655474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

