
1. J Leukoc Biol. 1996 May;59(5):697-708.

Development and characterization of a novel monoclonal antibody (mNI-11) that
induces cell adhesion of the LPS-stimulated human monocyte-like cell line U937.

Ikewaki N(1), Inoko H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kitasato University School of Nursing, Kitasato,
Sagamihara, Japan.

A monoclonal immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) antibody (mAb), designated mNI-11, was
produced by immunizing mice with the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated
monocyte-like cell line U937. The reactivity of mNI-11 was tested by the indirect
immunofluorescence method. The antigen defined by mNI-11 was found to be
expressed on U937 cells, LPS-stimulated U937 cells, normal CD14+ cells
(monocytes/macrophages), and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs).
Expression of the antigen defined by mNI-11 on HUVECs slightly increased in
response to exposure to tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and phorbol
myristate acetate (PMA). When the reactivity of mNI-11 and mAbs binding human
differentiation antigens such as CD11a, CD11b, CD11c, CD14, CD16, CD18, CD23,
CD28, CD29, CD31, CD43, CD44, CD45RA, CD49d, CD50, CD54, CD58, CD80, CD102,
CD106, HLA-class I, or HLA-class II antigen was compared, no mNI-11 reactivity
resembling that of these mAbs was found. mNI-11 markedly induced homotypic cell
aggregation of U937 cells when they were stimulated with LPS. The mNI-11-induced 
aggregation of LPS-stimulated U937 cells, referred to as LPS-U937 cells, required
neither Fc receptor engagement nor cross-linking of the antigen defined by mNI-11
because aggregation was induced by both F(ab')2 fragments and monovalent F(ab')
fragments of mNI-11. The mNI-11-induced aggregation was blocked by the addition
of ethylenediaminetetraacetate, and also when incubated at 4 degrees C. mAbs to
CD11a/CD18 (lymphocyte-function associated antigen-1; LFA-1) and CD54
(intercellular adhesion molecule-1; ICAM-1) completely blocked the LPS-U937 cell 
aggregation induced by mNI-11. The LPS-U937 cell aggregation induced by mNI-11
was partially but not completely blocked by the protein kinase C inhibitors
sphingosine and H-7, and was completely blocked by the protein-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor genistein. Interestingly, mNI-11 markedly promoted LPS-U937 cell
adhesion to HUVECs. The mNI-11-induced LPS-U937 cell adhesion to HUVECs was not
reduced in the presence of LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18) or ICAM-1 (CD54) mAbs. On the other
hand, LPS-U937 cells, whether treated with mNI-11 or not, sufficiently adhered to
the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin, but not to laminin or collagen type
I. However, mNI-11 did not markedly promote LPS-U937 cell adhesion to
fibronectin. Adhesion of LPS-U937 cells treated with mNI-11 to fibronectin was
completely blocked by CD29 (beta chain of very late antigens) mAb. The surface
antigen recognized by mNI-11 had a molecular size of approximately 97 kDa under
non-reducing conditions and approximately 117 kDa under reducing conditions, as
determined by immunoblotting analysis. We found that mNI-11 recognizes an
adhesion-associated molecule distinct from any previously reported in terms of
its pattern of cellular distribution and molecular weight, and also found that
mNI-11 has activity which induces cell adhesion/aggregation of U937 cells when
stimulated with LPS.

DOI: 10.1002/jlb.59.5.697 
PMID: 8656055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

