
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1305-15.

Phospholipase C-gamma1 interacts with conserved phosphotyrosyl residues in the
linker region of Syk and is a substrate for Syk.

Law CL(1), Chandran KA, Sidorenko SP, Clark EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.

Antigen receptor ligation on lymphocytes activates protein tyrosine kinases and
phospholipase C-gamma (PLC-gamma) isoforms. Glutathione S-transferase fusion
proteins containing the C-terminal Src-homology 2 [SH2(C)] domain of PLC-gamma1
bound to tyrosyl phosphorylated Syk. Syk isolated from antigen receptor-activated
B cells phosphorylated PLC-gamma1 on Tyr-771 and the key regulatory residue
Tyr-783 in vitro, whereas Lyn from the same B cells phosphorylated PLC-gamma1
only on Tyr-771. The ability of Syk to phosphorylate PLC-gamma1 required antigen 
receptor ligation, while Lyn was constitutively active. An mCD8-Syk cDNA
construct could be expressed as a tyrosyl-phosphorylated chimeric protein
tyrosine kinase in COS cells, was recognized by PLC-gamma1 SH2(C) in vitro, and
induced tyrosyl phosphorylation of endogenous PLC-gamma1 in vivo. Substitution of
Tyr-525 and Tyr-526 at the autophosphorylation site of Syk in mCD8-Syk
substantially reduced the kinase activity and the binding of this variant chimera
to PLC-gamma1 SH2(C) in vitro; it also failed to induce tyrosyl phosphorylation
of PLC-gamma1 in vivo. In contrast, substitution of Tyr-348 and Tyr-352 in the
linker region of Syk in mCD8-Syk did not affect the kinase activity of this
variant chimera but almost completely eliminated its binding to PLC-gamma1 SH(C) 
and completely eliminated its ability to induce tyrosyl phosphorylation of
PLC-gamma1 in vivo. Thus, an optimal kinase activity of Syk and an interaction
between the linker region of Syk with PLC-gamma1 are required for the tyrosyl
phosphorylation of PLC-gamma1.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.16.4.1305 
PMCID: PMC231114
PMID: 8657103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

