
1. J Exp Med. 1996 Apr 1;183(4):1817-27.

Heterogeneous phenotypes of expression of the NKB1 natural killer cell class I
receptor among individuals of different human histocompatibility leukocyte
antigens types appear genetically regulated, but not linked to major
histocompatibililty complex haplotype.

Gumperz JE(1), Valiante NM, Parham P, Lanier LL, Tyan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Stanford University, California 94305, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells that express the NKB1 receptor are inhibited from
killing target cells that possess human histocompatibility leukocyte antigen
(HLA) B molecules bearing the Bw4 serological epitope. To investigate whether
NKB1 expression is affected by HLA type, peripheral blood lymphocytes of 203
HLA-typed donors were examined. Most donors had a single population of NKB1+
cells, but some had two populations expressing different cell surface levels of
NKB1, and others had no detectable NKB1+ cells. Among the donors expressing NKB1,
both the relative abundance of NKB1+ NK cells and their level of cell surface
expression varied substantially. The percentage of NKB1+ NK cells ranged from 0
to >75% (mean 14.7%), and the mean fluorescence of the positive population varied
over three orders of magnitude. For each donor, the small percentage of T cells
expressing NKB1 (usually <2%), had a pattern of expression mirroring that of the 
NK cells. NKB1 expression by NK and T cells remained stable over the 2-yr period 
that five donors were tested. Patterns of NKB1 expression were not associated
with Bw4 or Bw6 serotype of the donor or with the presence of any individual
HLA-A or -B antigens. Cells expressing NKB1 are often found in donors who do not 
possess an appropriate class I ligand, and can be absent in those who express
Bw4+ HLA-B antigens. Family studies further suggested that the phenotype of NKB1 
expression is inherited but not HLA linked. Whereas identical twins show matching
patterns of NKB1 expression, HLA-identical siblings can differ in NKB1
expression, and conversely, HLA-disparate siblings can be similar. Thus NKB1
expression phenotypes are tightly regulated and extremely heterogeneous, but not 
correlated with HLA type.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.183.4.1817 
PMCID: PMC2192483
PMID: 8666938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

