
1. J Exp Med. 1996 Jun 1;183(6):2481-8.

Induction of unresponsiveness and impaired T cell expansion by staphylococcal
enterotoxin B in CD28-deficient mice.

Mittrücker HW(1), Shahinian A, Bouchard D, Kündig TM, Mak TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Biophysics, Ontario Cancer Institute, University 
of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We used CD28-deficient mice to analyze the importance of CD28 costimulation for
the response against Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) in vivo. CD28 was
necessary for the strong expansion of V beta 8+ T cells, but not for deletion.
The lack of expansion was not due to a failure of SEB to activate V beta 8+ T
cells, as V beta 8+ T cells from both CD28-/- and CD28+/+ mice showed similar
phenotypic changes within the first 24 h after SEB injection and cell cycle
analysis showed that an equal percentage of V beta 8+ T cells started to
proliferate. However, the phenotype and the state of proliferation of V beta 8+ T
cells was different at later time points. Furthermore, in CD28-/- mice injection 
with SEB led to rapid induction of unresponsiveness in SEB responsive T cells,
indicated by a drastic reduction of proliferation after secondary SEB stimulation
in vitro. Unresponsiveness could also be demonstrated in vivo, as CD28-/- mice
produced only marginal amounts of TNF alpha after rechallenge with SEB. In
addition CD28-/- mice were protected against a lethal toxic shock induced by a
second injection with SEB. Our results indicate that CD28 costimulation is
crucial for the T cell-mediated toxicity of SEB and demonstrate that T cell
stimulation in the absence of CD28 costimulation induces unresponsiveness in
vivo.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.183.6.2481 
PMCID: PMC2192623
PMID: 8676068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

