
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1996 Jul;105(1):31-8.

Selective CD4+ T cell deletion after specific activation in HIV-infected
individuals; protection by anti-CD28 monoclonal antibodies.

Cottrez F(1), Capron A, Groux H.

Author information: 
(1)Unit√© INSERM U167, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

AIDS is characterized by a progressive decline in the number of CD4+ T cells.
This is preceded by an early selective defect in the proliferation of these cells
to recall antigens [1-3], pokeweed mitogen (PWM) [4-6] and to superantigens (SAg)
[4,7]. In contrast, the proliferative response to phytohaemagglutinin (PHA)
remains intact [1,2,5]. We and others have shown that the proliferative defect in
response to some stimuli was in fact due to the induction of cell death [4,7].
The activation-induced cell death mechanism that explains the proliferative
defects observed in vitro might also account for the progressive in vivo deletion
of CD4+ T cells. Indeed, studies performed on different models of primates have
shown that induction of cell death in CD4+ T cells was detected only when T cells
were isolated from animals infected with a type of retrovirus that induces an
AIDS-like disease [8]. This correlation prompted us to analyse further the
mechanism of HIV-induced activation cell death to determine the specificity and
rate of induction of cell death. T cells from HIV-infected individuals were
activated with superantigens and the V beta T cell receptor (TCR) expression
analysed. Data presented here show that cell death is restricted to activated
CD4+ T cells, and does not affect bystander cells. More importantly, addition of 
anti-CD28 MoAb specifically inhibited the induction of apoptosis, raising
possibilities for therapy.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.1996.d01-716.x 
PMCID: PMC2200467
PMID: 8697632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

