
1. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Jul 1;239(1):229-34.

Kinetics of phosphorolysis of 3-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)adenine and
3-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)hypoxanthine, non-conventional substrates of
purine-nucleoside phosphorylase.

Bzowska A(1), Kulikowska E, Poopeiko NE, Shugar D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, University of Warsaw, Poland.

The properties of two non-conventional substrates of the calf-spleen and
Escherichia coli purine nucleoside phosphorylases (PNP),
3-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)adenine (RibfAde) and
3-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)hypoxanthine (RibfHyp), are described. In contrast to
Ado, RibfAde is a substrate for the mammalian enzyme. With the calf enzyme, the
pseudo-first-order rate constants (Vmax/K(m)) for phosphorolysis of RibfAde and
RibfHyp are 3% and 13%, respectively, that for phosphorolysis of Ino, while for
E. coli PNP the corresponding values are 22% and 30%, respectively. The Michaelis
constants (K(m)) for RibfAde were 800 microM (calf PNP) and 150 microM (E. coli
PNP). For RibfHyp, the corresponding K(m) values were 220 microM and 260 microM. 
Two well-characterized inhibitors of calf spleen PNP
[9-(2-fluoro-3,4-dihydroxybutyl)guanine] and E. coli PNP (formycin A) were found 
to inhibit phosphorolysis of RibfAde and RibfHyp with the same inhibition
constants as for Ino. Moreover, the inhibition was competitive, which indicates
that phosphorolysis of 3-beta-nucleosides occurs at the same active site as for
the natural substrate Ino. In particular, the substrate properties of both
3-beta-nucleosides are consistent with their binding to the enzyme in the
conformation anti to the imidazole ring about the glycosidic bond, which is
superimposable on the structure of natural 9-beta-nucleosides in the conformation
anti to the pyrimidine ring. The results are examined in relation to present
concepts regarding the binding of substrates and inhibitors at the active site(s)
of these enzymes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0229u.x 
PMID: 8706713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

