
1. J Periodontal Res. 1996 Feb;31(2):90-8.

Production of inflammatory mediators and cytokines by human gingival fibroblasts 
following bacterial challenge.

Dongari-Bagtzoglou AI(1), Ebersole JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, University of Texas, Health Science Center at San 
Antonio 78284, USA.

Bacteria can indirectly affect the course of periodontal diseases by activating
host cells to produce and release inflammatory mediators and cytokines. These
mediators and cytokines manifest potent proinflammatory and catabolic activity
and may play key roles in local amplification of the immune response as well as
in periodontal tissue breakdown. This study tested the effect of Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans (Aa) and Campylobacter rectus (Cr) challenge on PGE2, IL-1 
beta, IL-6 and IL-8 production by human gingival fibroblasts (HGF).
Contact-inhibited HGF were prepared and formalin-killed bacterial cells (Aa JP2, 
ATCC 29523 & 33384 and Cr ATCC 33238) at 10(6)-10(9) were added to the HGF.
Culture supernatants were collected at varying time intervals and analyzed for
cytokine and mediator content. All concentrations of Aa JP2 and Cr ATCC 33238
suppressed IL-1 beta production up to approximately 50% during the initial 3-12-h
period. No bacterial concentration tested was able to increase IL-1 beta
production above the maximum basal levels. Both bacterial species stimulated
production of IL-6 and IL-8. Aa JP2 did not affect PGE2 levels significantly,
whereas Cr ATCC 33238 was stimulatory only at the highest concentration tested
(10(9)). There were no significant differences among the three Aa strains with
respect to IL-1 beta production. However, Aa ATCC 29523 and ATCC 33384 were less 
capable of stimulating IL-6 secretion and more efficient in stimulating IL-8
production than Aa JP2. In general, Cr was the most potent enhancer of cytokine
and mediator production by HGF. In conclusion, Aa and Cr are capable of
amplifying the local immune response and promoting periodontal tissue
inflammation by stimulating HGF to secrete mainly IL-6 and IL-8.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.1996.tb00469.x 
PMID: 8708945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

