
1. Arch Oral Biol. 1996 Mar;41(3):263-70.

Effect of in vitro passage of healthy human gingival fibroblasts on cellular
morphology and cytokine expression.

Kent LW(1), Dyken RA, Rahemtulla F, Allison AC, Michalek SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Dentistry, University of Alabama at
Birmingham 35294-2170, USA.

Cytokines have been implicated in the regulation of antibody and inflammatory
responses, but their role in periodontal diseases has not been elucidated. In the
present study, cytokine production by human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) following 
in vitro passage was assessed in order to determine the basal levels of cytokine 
message and protein and to determine if the cellular morphology and the profile
of cytokines produced differed with passage. The HGF cell line F-CL was
established by explantation from non-inflamed gingival tissue, and cells from
passages 1-10 were studied. The number of cells was determined in confluent
cultures and cell morphology was examined by light microscopy. Fibroblasts from
confluent cultures were examined for cytokine mRNA by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and culture supernatants were assessed
for cytokines by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The morphology of F-CL
fibroblasts in passages 1-4 was normal, while fibroblasts in passages 5-10 were
larger. In general, the number of cells decreased from early to late passage.
Fibroblasts from passages 1-10 contained message for interleukin-1 beta, -6 and
-8, but not for interleukin-1 alpha or tumour necrosis factor-alpha.
Interleukin-6 was detected in culture supernatants of F-CL fibroblasts by the
enzyme immunoassay and its level decreased with increasing passage.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9969(95)00127-1 
PMID: 8735012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

