
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Aug 1;24(15):2981-9.

Sequence specific binding of chlamydial histone H1-like protein.

Kaul R(1), Allen M, Bradbury EM, Wenman WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Chlamydia trachomatis is one of the few prokaryotic organisms known to contain
proteins that bear homology to eukaryotic histone H1. Changes in macromolecular
conformation of DNA mediated by the histone H1-like protein (Hc1) appear to
regulate stage specific differentiation. We have developed a cross-linking
immunoprecipitation protocol to examine in vivo protein-DNA interaction by immune
precipitating chlamydial Hc1 cross linked to DNA. Our results strongly support
the presence of sequence specific binding sites on the chlamydial plasmid and hc1
gene upstream of its open reading frame. The preferential binding sites were
mapped to 520 bp BamHI-XhoI and 547 bp BamHI-DraI DNA fragments on the plasmid
and hc1 respectively. Comparison of these two DNA sequences using Bestfit program
has identified a 24 bp region with >75% identity that is unique to the chlamydial
genome. Double-stranded DNA prepared by annealing complementary oligonucleotides 
corresponding to the conserved 24 bp region bind Hc1, in contrast to control
sequences with similar A+T ratios. Further, Hc1 binds to DNA in a strand specific
fashion, with preferential binding for only one strand. The site specific
affinity to plasmid DNA was also demonstrated by atomic force microscopy data
images. Binding was always followed by coiling, shrinking and aggregation of the 
affected DNA. Very low protein-DNA ratio was required if incubations were carried
out in solution. However, if DNA was partially immobilized on mica substrate
individual strands with dark foci were still visible even after the addition of
excess Hc1.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/24.15.2981 
PMCID: PMC146046
PMID: 8760883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

