
1. Biochem J. 1996 Aug 15;318 ( Pt 1):255-61.

The SH3 domain of Src tyrosyl protein kinase interacts with the N-terminal splice
region of the PDE4A cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase RPDE-6 (RNPDE4A5).

O'Connell JC(1), McCallum JF, McPhee I, Wakefield J, Houslay ES, Wishart W,
Bolger G, Frame M, Houslay MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, I.B.L.S., University of
Glasgow, Scotland, U.K.

The PDE4A (type IV) cAMP-specific, rolipram-inhibited phosphodiesterase RPDE-6
(RNPDE4A5), when transiently expressed in COS7 cells, could be complexed with the
v-Src-SH3 domain expressed as a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein.
RPDE-6 did not interact with GST itself. This complex was not disrupted by
treatment with high NaCl concentration together with Triton X-100. Interaction
was apparently determined by the N-terminal splice region of RPDE-6, as the PDE4A
splice variant RPDE-39, which differs from RPDE-6 at the extreme N-terminus,
failed to associate with v-Src-SH3; met26RD1 (where RD1 is rat 'dunc-like' PDE), 
which has the N-terminal splice region deleted, failed to associate with
v-Src-SH3, and the association of RPDE-6 and v-Src-SH3 was blocked by a fusion
protein formed from the N-terminal splice region. RDPE-6 showed binding to GST
fusion proteins of both the intact Src kinase and an SH2-SH3 construct but did
not bind to the Src-SH2 domain or to the adaptor protein Grb-2. RPDE-6 could be
co-immunoprecipitated from cytosol extracts of transfected cells by using
anti-Src antiserum. RPDE-6 exhibited selectivity in binding to the SH3 domains of
c-Abl, Crk, Csk, Lck, Lyn, Fyn and v-Src, with binding to the SH3 regions of the 
Src-related tyrosyl kinases Lyn and Fyn being the most effective. The binding of 
RPDE-6 to the SH3 domains of Crk, Csk and Lck led to a marked reduction in PDE
activity, but no change was apparent in complexes with other species. Endogenous 
RPDE-6 from brain, but not endogenous RPDE-39 from testis, bound to the Src-SH3
domain. We suggest that the PDE4A splice variant RPDE-6 has a propensity for
interaction with selective SH3 domains, in particular those from Src and the
Src-related tyrosyl kinases Lyn and Fyn. This interaction seems to be governed by
alternative splicing of the PDE4A gene, because RPDE-39, a splice variant that
lacks the proline-rich N-terminal splice region of RPDE-6, does not interact with
these SH3 domains. It is proposed that the binding site on RPDE-6 for SH3 domains
lies within the unique first 102 residues of its N-terminal splice domain, where 
two motifs representing Class I SH3 binding sites with selectivity for Src kinase
SH3 domains can be identified and one motif for a putative Class II SH3 binding
site.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3180255 
PMCID: PMC1217616
PMID: 8761480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

