
1. Eur Biophys J. 1996;24(6):371-80.

Solution studies of the SH2 domain from the fyn tyrosine kinase: secondary
structure, backbone dynamics and protein association.

Pintar A(1), Hensmann M, Jumel K, Pitkeathly M, Harding SE, Campbell ID.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Oxford University, UK.

The SH2 domain from Fyn tyrosine kinase, corresponding to residues 155-270 of the
human enzyme, was expressed as a GST-fusion protein in a pGEX-E. coli system.
After thrombin cleavage and removal of GST, the protein was studied by
heteronuclear NMR. Two different phosphotyrosyl-peptides were synthesized and
added to the SH2 domain. One peptide corresponded to the regulatory C-terminal
tail region of Fyn. Sequence-specific assignment of NMR spectra was achieved
using a combination of 1H-15N-correlated 2D HSQC, 15N-edited 3D TOCSY-HMQC, and
15N-edited 3D NOESY-HMQC spectra. By analysis of the alpha-proton chemical shifts
and NOE intensities, the positions of secondary structural elements were
determined and found to correspond closely to that seen in the crystal structure 
of the, homologous, Src-SH2 domain. To investigate the internal dynamics of the
protein backbone, T1 and T2 relaxation parameters were measured on the free
protein, as well as on both peptide complexes. Analytical ultracentrifugation and
dynamic light scattering were employed to measure the effect of concentration and
peptide-binding on self-association. The results suggest that, at NMR-sample
concentrations, the free protein is present in at least dimeric form.
Phosphopeptide binding and lower concentration significantly, but not completely,
shift the equilibrium towards monomers. The possible role of this protein
association in the regulation of the Src-family tyrosine kinases is discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00576709 
PMID: 8765711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

