
1. J Neurochem. 1996 Mar;66(3):1103-12.

Tyrosine kinases are required for catecholamine secretion and mitogen-activated
protein kinase activation in bovine adrenal chromaffin cells.

Cox ME(1), Ely CM, Catling AD, Weber MJ, Parsons SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville 22908, USA.

Nicotine-induced catecholamine secretion in bovine adrenomedullary chromaffin
cells is accompanied by rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple cellular
proteins, most notably the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs). The
requirement for activation of tyrosine kinases and MAPKs in chromaffin cell
exocytosis was investigated using a panel of tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Genistein and tyrphostin 23, two compounds that inhibit tyrosine kinases by
distinct mechanisms, were found to inhibit secretion by > 90% in cells stimulated
by nicotine, 55 mM KCl, or the Ca2+ ionophore A23187. Inhibition of secretion
induced by all three secretagogues correlated with a block in both protein
tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of the MAPKs and their activators (MEKs) 
in situ. However, neither genistein nor tyrphostin 23 inhibited the activities of
the MAPKs or MEKs in vitro. These results indicate that the target(s) of
inhibition lie downstream of Ca2+ influx and upstream of MEK activation. This
Ca(2+)-activated tyrosine kinase activity could not be accounted for entirely by 
c-Src or Fyn (two nonreceptor tyrosine kinases that are expressed abundantly in
chromaffin cells), because their in vitro kinase activities were not inhibited by
tyrphostin 23 and only partially inhibited by genistein. These results
demonstrate that an unidentified Ca(2+)-activated tyrosine kinase(s) is required 
for MAPK activation and exocytosis in chromaffin cells and suggest that MAPK
participates in the regulation of secretion.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1996.66031103.x 
PMID: 8769872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

