
1. Immunol Res. 1995;14(3):176-88.

Role of B7 signaling in the differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells to effector
interleukin-4-producing T helper cells.

Gause WC(1), Urban JF, Linsley P, Lu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, Md. 20814, USA.

Signaling through the T cell receptor must be accompanied by costimulatory
signals for the differentiation of naive T cells to cytokine-producing effector T
helper cells. The costimulatory signal through CD28 is required for T cell
activation resulting in increased interleukin (IL)-2 production in vitro, but its
role in the production of IL-4 and in the in vivo response is still unclear. We
have examined the effects of blocking CTLA-4 (the CD28 homologue) ligand
interactions on the in vivo development of IL-4-producing T helper effector cells
during a primary mucosal immune response to the nematode parasite Heligmosomoides
polygyrus and during a primary systemic immune response to immunogenic anti-IgD
antibodies. Our results demonstrate that CD28 and/or CTLA-4 signaling is required
for T cell priming leading to IL-4 cytokine production, B cell activation, and
IgE secretion during both immune responses, suggesting that other signaling
molecules do not substitute for these molecules in either of these two different 
immune responses. Furthermore, the CD28 ligands, B7-1 and B7-2, can substitute
for each other in providing the required T cell costimulatory ligand interactions
during the primary immune response to H. polygyrus. In contrast, memory T cells
during the challenge immune response do not require CD28/CTLA-4 ligand
interactions for IL-4 production and T helper effector function.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02918215 
PMID: 8778208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

