
1. Med Microbiol Immunol. 1996 May;185(1):19-25.

Expansion of T cells negative for CD28 expression in HIV infection. Relation to
activation markers and cell adhesion molecules, and correlation with prognostic
markers.

K채mmerer R(1), Iten A, Frei PC, B체rgisser P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Medizinische Universit채t zu L체beck,
Germany.

CD28 is a transmembrane glycoprotein that provides T cells with an essential
co-stimulatory signal during antigen presentation. Using flow cytometry, we
document here an expansion of CD28- T cells in HIV infection. Whereas the
percentage of CD4+CD28+ T cells among total lymphocytes was decreased, a small
increase of the percentage of CD4+CD28- T cells was observed. In the CD8+ subset,
there was a marked expansion of CD8+CD28- T cells. An increased percentage of
CD8+ T cells positive for HLA-DR was found in both CD28+ and CD28- cells. Results
were similar for CD38 expression. HIV infection was also distinguished by a shift
from LFA-1lowCD28low to LFA-1highCD28high and LFA-1high-CD28neg expression
pattern on CD8+ T cells. Negative correlations were found between percentage and 
absolute number of CD8+CD28+ T cells and several serum parameters usually
associated with poor prognosis (IgA, IgE, beta 2-microglobulin and HIV-1 p24
antigen). Thus, HIV infection is characterized by a marked expansion of CD28- T
cells with an abnormal expression of activation markers and cell adhesion
molecules. In addition, CD8+CD28+, but not CD8+CD28- or total CD8+ T cell
numbers, correlated with the levels of established serological markers of disease
severity or progression and may, therefore, have predictive value.

DOI: 10.1007/s004300050010 
PMID: 8803949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

