
1. Oncogene. 1996 Sep 5;13(5):971-82.

PIC 1, a novel ubiquitin-like protein which interacts with the PML component of a
multiprotein complex that is disrupted in acute promyelocytic leukaemia.

Boddy MN(1), Howe K, Etkin LD, Solomon E, Freemont PS.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Structure Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) arises following a reciprocal translocation
t(15;17) that fuses PML with retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA). The PML-RARA
fusion protein targets and disrupts nuclear multiprotein complexes called PODs,
ND10 or NBs, a process which is associated with a block in myeloid
differentiation leading to APL. A human B-cell cDNA library was screened for
PML-interacting clones and a single positive clone (PIC1) was isolated. The
sequence of PIC1 shows 52% identity to a S. cerevisiae ubiquitin-like protein
that was cloned as a suppressor of mutations in MIF2, a protein required for
mitotic spindle integrity during anaphase. Transient transfection of NIH3T3 cells
with PIC1 results in a nuclear staining pattern coincident with that of
endogenous mouse PML. Further, cotransfection of PIC1 with human PML produces a
completely overlapping staining pattern between the two proteins. An antibody
raised against PIC1 detects a punctate staining pattern in HeLa cells that is
coincident with endogenous human PML. There is no significant colocalisation
observed between the staining of PML/ PML-RARA and PIC1 in an APL-derived cell
line NB4, as compared to cells expressing only wild type PML. However, following 
all trans retinoic acid treatment of NB4 cells a significant relocalisation of
PIC1 and PML is observed. PIC1 is the first identified NB-associated protein that
interacts with PML, the function of which may lead to a fuller understanding of
the molecular events leading to APL.


PMID: 8806687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

