
1. J Immunol. 1996 Oct 1;157(7):2857-63.

Regulation of superantigen-induced T cell activation in the absence and the
presence of MHC class II.

Lando PA(1), Olsson C, Kalland T, Newton D, Kotb M, Dohlsten M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacia and Upjohn, Lund Research Center, Sweden.

To study MHC class II-dependent and -independent SAg2 activation and the relative
importance of CD80/CD28 costimulation, staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA) was
presented to T cells as a fusion protein containing the Fab fragment of an mAb
directed against the CA215 glycoprotein. Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells
transfected with HLA-DR4, CA215, and CD80, individually or in combinations, were 
used as presenting cells. A strong T cell proliferation was obtained when
C215Fab-SEA fusion proteins were presented by CHO-DR/CD80 or CHO-CA215/CD80
double transfectants, whereas only low levels of proliferation were seen in the
absence of CD80. Large amounts of IL-2, IFN-gamma, and TNF were produced in
addition to an increase in IL-2 mRNA as a result of CD80 costimulation. Only
approximately 50% of the SEA-reactive T cells responded by expression of IL-2
receptor chains and by blast formation when activated with SEA in the absence of 
MHC class II. Reverse transcription-PCR-assisted repertoire analysis of
SEA-reactive TCR V beta families showed that the CA215-dependent activation
involved an expansion of fewer TCR V beta families compared with MHC class
II-dependent activation. One-half of the six analyzed TCR V beta families were
expanded independently of class II. This indicates that MHC class II has only a
partial influence on the TCR V beta repertoire imprinted by SAg. This finding
redefines the role of MHC class II in SAg presentation. It is suggested that MHC 
class II molecules are selected as SAg-binding molecules mainly as a suitable
targeting receptor for professional APC expressing costimulatory molecules such
as CD80 and CD86.


PMID: 8816390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

