
1. Mol Microbiol. 1995 Nov;18(4):641-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2958.1995.mmi_18040641.x.

Expression of the gltP gene of Escherichia coli in a glutamate
transport-deficient mutant of Rhodobacter sphaeroides restores chemotaxis to
glutamate.

Jacobs MH(1), van der Heide T, Tolner B, Driessen AJ, Konings WN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology 
Institute, University of Groningen, Haren, The Netherlands.

Rhodobacter sphaeroides is chemotactic to glutamate and most other amino acids.
In Escherichia coli, chemotaxis involves a membrane-bound sensor that either
binds the amino acid directly or interacts with the binding protein loaded with
the amino acid. In R. sphaeroides, chemotaxis is thought to require both the
uptake and the metabolism of the amino acid. Glutamate is accumulated by the
cells via a binding protein-dependent system. To determine the role of the
binding protein and transport in glutamate taxis, mutants were created by Tn5
insertion mutagenesis and selected for growth in the presence of the toxic
glutamine analogue gamma-glutamyl-hydrazide. One of the mutants, R. sphaeroides
MJ7, was defective in glutamate uptake but showed wild-type levels of binding
protein. The mutant showed no chemotactic response to glutamate. Both glutamate
uptake and chemotaxis were recovered when the gltP gene, coding for the
H(+)-linked glutamate carrier of E. coli, was expressed in R. sphaeroides MJ7. It
is concluded that the chemotactic response to glutamate strictly requires uptake 
of glutamate, supporting the view that intracellular metabolism is needed for
chemotaxis in R. sphaeroides.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1995.mmi_18040641.x 
PMID: 8817487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

