
1. J Bacteriol. 1996 Oct;178(20):6049-55.

Isolation and characterization of a novel gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane-degrading
bacterium.

Thomas JC(1), Berger F, Jacquier M, Bernillon D, Baud-Grasset F, Truffaut N,
Normand P, Vogel TM, Simonet P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Microbienne du Sol, UMR Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique 5557, Universit√© Lyon I, Villeurbanne, France.

The natural biotic capacity of soils to degrade gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane
(gamma-HCH, lindane) was estimated using an enrichment technique based on the
ability of soil bacteria to develop on synthetic media and degrade the xenobiotic
compound, used as the sole source of carbon and energy. Bacterial inocula from
relatively highly contaminated soils (from wood treatment factories) were found
to promote efficiently the degradation of gamma-HCH, which subsequently permitted
isolation of a competent gamma-HCH-degrading microorganism. The decrease of
gamma-HCH concurrently with the release of chloride ions and the production of
CO2 demonstrated the complete mineralization of gamma-HCH mediated by the
isolate. This was confirmed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analyses
showing that degradation subproducts of gamma-HCH included an unidentified
tetrachlorinated compound and subsequently 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene and
2,5-dichlorophenol. The two linA- and linB-like genes coding, respectively, for a
gamma-HCH dehydrochlorinase and a dehalogenase were characterized by using a PCR 
strategy based on sequence homologies with previously published sequences from
Sphingomonas paucimobilis UT26. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the linA-like
region revealed the presence of a 472-bp open reading frame exhibiting high
homology with the linA gene from S. paucimobilis, while a preliminary study also 
indicated strong homology among the two linB genes. All enzymes involved in the
gamma-HCH degradative pathway appear to be extracellular and encoded by genes
located on the chromosome, although numerous cryptic plasmids have been detected.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.178.20.6049-6055.1996 
PMCID: PMC178465
PMID: 8830705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

