
1. Mol Immunol. 1996 Jul;33(10):835-46.

Differential regulation of p72syk expression in naive and proliferating CD4-CD8+ 
T cells.

Orchansky PL(1), Matsuuchi L, Ericsson PO, Teh HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.

A well-known consequence of TCR stimulation in proliferating T cells is cell
death by apoptosis. We have previously shown that the extent of tyrosine
phosphorylation of TCR zeta, CD3 gamma, and CD3 epsilon subunits in proliferating
CD4-CD8+ T cells after TCR stimulation was decreased when compared to similarly
stimulated naive T cells expressing the same TCR. Furthermore, these differences 
correlated with a decrease in the specific kinase activity of p56lck and p59fyn, 
with a corresponding increase in the specific kinase activity of p50rsk, a
negative regulator of src-family tyrosine kinases. In this study we determined
whether kinases that bind tyrosine phosphorylated TCR zeta chain were
differentially regulated in naive and proliferating cells. Chemically synthesized
cytoplasmic domains of the TCR zeta chain were fully phosphorylated in vitro with
p56lck and used to precipitate TCR zeta binding proteins in naive and
proliferating cells. Using this method we found that both ZAP-70 and p72syk bound
tyrosine phosphorylated TCR zeta very efficiently. More interestingly, p72syk was
found to be expressed only in naive but not proliferating cells. Kinetic studies 
indicate that more than 48 hr of activation was required for ceasation of p72syk 
expression. We also showed that the inability to detect p72syk expression in
proliferating cells was not due to its translocation to cytoskeletal compartments
in proliferating cells. We propose that the differential regulation of ZAP-70 and
p72syk in naive and proliferating cells may contribute to the uncoupling of the
TCR signaling pathway from downstream signaling events leading to distinct
functional outcomes in these two cell types after TCR stimulation.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(96)84609-8 
PMID: 8845015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

