
1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1996 Oct;81(10):3604-6.

Hypercortisolemia increases plasma interleukin-10 concentrations during human
endotoxemia--a clinical research center study.

van der Poll T(1), Barber AE, Coyle SM, Lowry SF.

Author information: 
(1)Cornell University Medical College, Department of Surgery, New York, New York 
10021, USA.

Hypercortisolemia directly before the administration of endotoxin (LPS) to normal
humans completely prevents the release of the proinflammatory cytokine tumor
necrosis factor, whereas hypercortisolemia 12 h to 7 days before the injection of
LPS is associated with enhanced tumor necrosis factor release. To determine the
effect of elevated cortisol levels on the secretion of the antiinflammatory
cytokine interleukin-10 (IL-10), 23 healthy men were given iv LPS (lot EC-5; 2
ng/kg) alone or in combination with a continuous iv infusion of hydrocortisone (3
micrograms/kg.min) for 6 h immediately before or 6, 12, or 144 h before LPS
injection. LPS induced a monophasic increase in plasma IL-10 concentrations that 
peaked after 2 h (162 +/- 27 pg/mL; P < 0.0001). In subjects who were infused
with hydrocortisone directly before LPS administration, IL-10 concentrations were
much higher (1784 +/- 331 pg/mL; P < 0.0001 vs. LPS only), whereas
hypercortisolemia 6, 12, or 144 h before LPS injection did not influence
LPS-induced IL-10 levels. In human whole blood in vitro, hydrocortisone caused a 
dose-dependent reduction of LPS-induced IL-10 levels. Further, hydrocortisone
reversed the increase in IL-10 concentrations by epinephrine in LPS-stimulated
whole blood. Stimulation of IL-10 release may contribute to the antiinflammatory 
properties of glucocorticoids.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.81.10.8855809 
PMID: 8855809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

