
1. Eur J Immunogenet. 1996 Aug;23(4):321-8.

HLA five-locus haplotypes in Finns.

Ik√§heimo I(1), Silvennoinen-Kassinen S, Tiilikainen A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Oulu, Finland.

The extreme polymorphism of HLA genes makes them a powerful tool for
distinguishing between different genetic populations. Five-locus HLA haplotypes
of Finns (from Oulu, Northern Finland) are described here in order to
characterize further the migration pathways of the population to Finland after
the Ice Age. From random families, 364 haplotypes were obtained. The most
frequent Finnish haplotype A3,Cw4,B35,DR1,DQ1 (7.7%) is a Caucasoid ancestral
haplotype and is shared with Italians of Celtic and non-Celtic origin. The
haplotype A1,Cw7,B8,DR3,DQ2, which occurs in 4.7% of Finns, is the most frequent 
haplotype in Caucasoids. The haplotypes A3,Cw7,B7,DR2,DQ1 (3.6%) and
A2,Cw7,B7,DR2,DQ1 (2.5%) are shared with several Caucasoid populations and the
latter also with Jamaican blacks. A2,Cw5,B44,DR5,DQ3 (0.8%) is shared with
Italians of Celtic and non-Celtic origin, A2,Cw6,B13,DR7,DQ2 (1.1%) with
Caucasoids in the USA and A9,Cw4,B35,DR1,DQ1 (0.8%) with Mongoloids. The
haplotypes A2,CW3,B62,DR4,DQ3 (3.0%), A2,Cw2,B27,DR8,DQ4 (1.7%),
A2,Cw3,B62,DR6,DQ1 (1.4%) and A2,Cw1,B27,DR4,DQ3 (1.4%) were also found to be
among the most frequent in the Finnish population. The most frequent HLA
haplotypes are consistent with the postulated ancient migration of populations
from southern Scandinavia and Germany to Finland, the most frequent haplotype
suggesting a common Celtic origin and one less frequent haplotype suggesting an
influence from the east.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1744-313x.1996.tb00128.x 
PMID: 8858288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

