
1. Transplantation. 1996 Oct 15;62(7):1011-8.

Blockade of multiple costimulatory receptors induces hyporesponsiveness:
inhibition of CD2 plus CD28 pathways.

Woodward JE(1), Qin L, Chavin KD, Lin J, Tono T, Ding Y, Linsley PS, Bromberg JS,
Baliga P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

T-lymphocyte activation requires engagement of the T cell receptor with
antigen-major histocompatibility complex, and simultaneous ligation of
costimulatory pathways via the lymphocyte receptors CD2 and CD28/ CTLA4. Anti-CD2
monoclonal antibody (mAb) blocks the interaction of the antigen-presenting cell
receptor CD48 with its ligand CD2, whereas CTLA4Ig binds with high affinity to
the antigen-presenting cell ligands B7-1 and B7-2, blocking their interaction
with CD28/CTLA4. We tested the immunosuppressive effects of simultaneously
blocking both costimulatory pathways. Using donor C57BL/6J (H2b) hearts
transplanted to CBA/J (H2k) recipients, anti-CD2 mAb plus CTLA4Ig administered at
the time of transplantation prolonged cardiac allograft mean survival time to
>120 days compared with untreated controls (12.2+/-0.5 days, P<0.01), anti-CD2
mAb alone (24.8+/-1.0 days, P<0.01), or CTLA4Ig alone (55.0+/-2.0 days, P<0.01). 
Retransplantation of these recipients with donor-specific and third-party grafts 
demonstrated that hyporesponsiveness and tolerance were achieved. In vitro
stimulation of lymphocytes from tolerant recipients with donor-specific
alloantigen resulted in normal cytotoxic T lymphocyte and mixed lymphocyte
reaction responses, showing that clonal deletion or anergy did not occur, but
that graft adaptation or suppression likely helped to maintain long-term graft
survival. In vitro combinations of anti-CD2 mAb and CTLA4Ig suppressed the
generation of allogeneic cytotoxic T lymphocytes (58%) and the mixed lymphocyte
reaction (36%); CTLA4Ig was more effective in this regard and the two agents were
not synergistic. Anti-CD2 mAb and CTLA4Ig suppressed mitogen-driven proliferation
in differential fashions, suggesting that they affected independent signaling
pathways. Anti-CD2 mAb and CTLA4Ig also inhibited interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, and
IL-2 receptor (CD25). These data indicate that anti-CD2 mAb plus CTLA4Ig induces 
hyporesponsiveness and tolerance. The mechanism is likely related to the initial 
disruption of independent pathways of T-lymphocyte activation leading to
antigen-specific long-term graft survival.

DOI: 10.1097/00007890-199610150-00021 
PMID: 8878397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

