
1. Blood. 1996 Nov 1;88(9):3336-48.

A cell proliferation-dependent multiprotein complex NC-3A positively regulates
the CD34 promoter via a TCATTT-containing element.

Perrotti D(1), Bell√≥n T, Trotta R, Martinez R, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The CD34 cell surface antigen is a glycoprotein expressed by hematopoietic stem
and progenitor cells and also by certain nonhematopoietic cell-types. Because
CD34 expression is regulated both at the transcriptional and the
posttranscriptional level, we attempted to identify factors that, by interacting 
with the 5' flanking region of the human CD34 gene, may regulate its promoter
activity in proliferating hematopoietic cells. By electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay, UV cross-linking and DNase I footprinting analyses, we identified a
multiprotein complex, designated NC-3A, that specifically interacts with the CD34
promoter region from nucleotides -375 to -351. Sequence analysis of this region
revealed the presence of a distinct motif, TCATTT. Chloramphenicol
acetyl-transferase assays used to assess promoter activity in transiently
transfected cells showed that this TCATTT-containing element, which is conserved 
in both the human and the murine CD34 genes, mediates positive regulatory
activity in hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cells, and acts as an enhancer
when placed upstream of a heterologous promoter. Moreover, loss of CD34 promoter 
activity was caused by mutation of the TCATTT motif. In addition, the interaction
of the nuclear multiprotein complex NC-3A with this enhancer element is
proliferation-dependent. These data indicate that, although not cell-type
specific, the formation of a multiprotein complex NC-3A interacting with the
region from nucleotides -375 to 351 plays an important role in controlling CD34
promoter activity in proliferating hematopoietic cells.


PMID: 8896398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

