
1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 1996 Nov;111(3):218-29.

Monoclonal antibody LR-1 recognizes murine heat-stable antigen, a marker of
antigen-presenting cells and developing hematopoietic cells.

Hunt DW(1), Jiang HJ, Granville DJ, King DE, Levy JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.

The rat monoclonal antibody LR-1 was initially described to be reactive with an
antigen present on murine splenic B lymphocytes. However, flow-cytometric
analyses of cells obtained from thymus, bone marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes
showed that LR-1 stained approximately 95, 95, 60-70 and 20% of cells present
within these tissues in normal DBA/2 mice. The marker recognized by LR-1 was
present on peripheral erythrocytes and splenic dendritic cells, and activation
with lipopolysaccharide A further increased expression of this antigen by splenic
B cells. This particular tissue and cellular distribution was similar to that
delineated with monoclonal antibodies reactive with heat-stable antigen (HSA).
Duallabelling studies were conducted to compare the reactivity patterns of LR-1
and the HSA-reactive monoclonal antibody J11d and indicated that both antibodies 
recognized splenocytes bearing B cell (IgM) or erythroid (TER-119, CD71) but not 
T cell (CD4, CD8) markers. Splenocytes exposed to phosphoinostol-specific
phospholipase C showed marked reduction in LR-1 binding, indicating that this
antibody recognized a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored cell surface protein,
consistent with the known structure of HSA. Mixing of LR-1 with the HSA-specific 
antibodies J11d or M1/69 provided flow-cytometric profiles indistinguishable from
those obtained with either antibody alone. However, LR-1 inhibited M1/69 binding 
to splenocytes by 83%, while J11d reduced M1/69 binding to these cells by only
18%. This finding suggested that LR-1 and M1/69 recognize identical splenic HSA
epitopes, while LR-1 and J11d bind distinct antigenic determinants of spleen HSA.
Western blot analysis of splenocyte, thymocyte, bone marrow cell and erythrocyte 
detergent extracts revealed that LR-1 reacted with glycoforms of HSA of known
molecular weights (30-55 kD). Thus, LR-1 recognizes HSA, the murine analogue of
human CD24, and will be a useful reagent with which to investigate the role of
HSA in the immune response and hematopoiesis.

DOI: 10.1159/000237371 
PMID: 8917116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

