
1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):31929-36.

The role of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in apoptosis induced by ultraviolet C
and gamma radiation. Duration of JNK activation may determine cell death and
proliferation.

Chen YR(1), Wang X, Templeton D, Davis RJ, Tan TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. ttan@bcm.tmc.edu

c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) participate in cellular responses to mitogenic
stimuli, environmental stresses, and apoptotic agents. The mechanisms by which
JNK integrates with other signaling pathways and regulates the diverse cellular
events are unclear. We found JNK, but not p38-mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) or extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2, to be persistently activated
in apoptosis induced by gamma radiation, UV-C, and anti-Fas treatment. Direct
correlation was found between JNK activation and apoptosis induced by UV-C and
gamma radiation; however, JNK induction and apoptosis induced by Fas signaling
were not well correlated. Overexpression of activated JNK1 caused cell death in
transfected cells, and the expression of a dominant-negative mutant of MAPK
kinase 1 or JNK1 (but not a dominant-negative mutant of p38-MAPK or c-Raf)
prevented the UV-C- and gamma radiation-induced cell death. The inductions of JNK
in T-cell activation and apoptosis were distinguished by the different activation
patterns, transient versus persistent, respectively. Co-treatment with a tyrosine
phosphatase inhibitor (sodium orthovanadate) and T-cell activation signals
(phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate plus ionomycin) prolonged JNK induction,
followed by T-cell apoptosis. Our data revealed the requirement of the JNK
pathway in radiation-induced apoptosis and implicated the importance of the
duration of JNK activation in determining the cell fates.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.50.31929 
PMID: 8943238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

