
1. J Immunol. 1996 Dec 1;157(11):5027-33.

Shared epitopes for HLA-A3-restricted melanoma-reactive human CTL include a
naturally processed epitope from Pmel-17/gp100.

Skipper JC(1), Kittlesen DJ, Hendrickson RC, Deacon DD, Harthun NL, Wagner SN,
Hunt DF, Engelhard VH, Slingluff CL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22908,
USA.

Human CD8+ CTL recognize peptides bound to class I MHC molecules on the surface
of melanoma cells. Several peptides derived from melanocyte lineage-specific
proteins have been identified as epitopes for HLA-A2 restricted melanoma-reactive
CTL. Because less than half of melanoma patients express HLA-A2, it is important 
to identify CTL epitopes restricted by other common MHC molecules including
HLA-A1 and -A3. We have generated HLA-A3-restricted human CTL that recognize one 
or more shared melanoma Ags. All of the melanomas recognized by one of these CTL 
lines express Pmel-17/gp100, and those that fail to express this Ag are not
lysed. This CTL line also specifically recognizes the lymphoblastoid line C1R-A3 
following infection with a recombinant vaccinia encoding the melanocyte
lineage-specific protein Pmel-17/gp100. Thus, at least one Pmel-17/ gp100 peptide
is an epitope for this CTL line. We have identified ALLAVGATK (Pmel-17/gp100
residues 17-25) as an epitope for this CTL line and have shown that it is
naturally processed and presented by HLA-A3 on melanoma cells. A second
HLA-A3-restricted melanoma-reactive CTL line recognizes at least one additional
shared epitope. These findings suggest that cellular immune responses directed
against multiple shared melanoma epitopes exist in the 20 to 25% of melanoma
patients who express HLA-A3. In addition, immunotherapy directed against
Pmel-17/gp100 and other shared melanoma Ags may be useful in a large subset of
these patients.


PMID: 8943411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

