
1. Blood. 1996 Dec 1;88(11):4239-45.

Interleukin-7 is a critical growth factor in early human T-cell development.

Plum J(1), De Smedt M, Leclercq G, Verhasselt B, Vandekerckhove B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University
Hospital of Ghent, Belgium.

Highly purified human CD34+ fetal liver stem cells differentiate to mature T
cells when seeded in vitro into isolated fetal thymic lobes of severe combined
immunodeficient (SCID) mice followed by fetal thymus organ culture (FTOC). Here, 
this chimeric human-mouse FTOC was used to address the role of interleukin-7
(IL-7) and of the alpha chain of the IL-7 receptor (IL-7R alpha) in early human
T-cell development. We report that addition of either the monoclonal antibody
(MoAb) M25, which neutralizes both human and mouse IL-7, or the MoAb M21, which
recognizes and blocks exclusively the human high-affinity alpha-chain of the
IL-7R, results in a profound reduction in human thymic cellularity. Analysis of
lymphoid subpopulations indicates that a highly reduced number of cells undergo
maturation from CD34+ precursor cells toward CD4+CD3-CD1+ progenitor cells and
subsequently toward CD4+CD8+ thymocytes. Our results reveal a critical role for
IL-7 during early human thymocyte development, and may explain the absence or
highly reduced levels of T cells in patients with X-linked SCID. The molecular
defect in these patients has been shown to be a mutation in the gamma chain of
the IL-2R. Although this gamma chain is not only present in the IL-2R, but also
forms an essential part of other cytokine receptors, including IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, 
IL-13, and IL-15, the T-cell defect in these patients can be explained by the
fact that IL-7 is not able to transduce its signal by the molecular defect of the
common gamma (gamma c) chain and that IL-7 is indispensable for T-cell
development.


PMID: 8943859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

