
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;16(12):6736-43.

CD28 mediates a potent costimulatory signal for rapid degradation of IkappaBbeta 
which is associated with accelerated activation of various NF-kappaB/Rel
heterodimers.

Harhaj EW(1), Maggirwar SB, Good L, Sun SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey Medical Center, Hershey 17033, USA.

Optimal activation of T cells requires at least two signals delivered by the
T-cell receptor complex and costimulatory molecules such as CD28. The CD28
signaling participates in the transcription of the interleukin-2 gene through
activation of an enhancer termed the CD28-responsive element (CD28RE).
Stimulation of CD28 enhances mitogen-mediated induction of CD28RE-binding
proteins including members of the NF-kappaB/Rel transcription factor family,
although the underlying mechanism remains elusive. In this report, we show that
CD28 costimulation leads to biphasic induction of NF-kappaB/Rel heterodimers,
including early-phase induction of p50/RelA and c-Rel/RelA and late-phase
induction of p50/c-Rel. Interestingly, activation of these NF-kappaB/Rel
complexes by the CD28 signal is associated with the rapid degradation of both
IkappaBalpha and IkappaBbeta, two major cytoplasmic inhibitors of NF-kappaB/Rel. 
Although IkappaBalpha degradation can be induced by phorbol ester alone,
degradation of IkappaBbeta is largely dependent on the CD28 costimulatory signal.
We further demonstrate that CD28-mediated transactivation of the CD28RE enhancer 
is potently inhibited by an N-terminal truncation mutant of IkappaBbeta that is
incapable of responding to the degradation signals. Together, these results
suggest that the CD28 costimulatory signal augments activation of NF-kappaB/Rel
by promoting degradation of IkappaBbeta as well as enhancing degradation of
IkappaBalpha and that induction of NF-kappaB/Rel serves as an essential step in
the signal-mediated activation of the CD28RE enhancer.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.16.12.6736 
PMCID: PMC231676
PMID: 8943328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

