
1. Tissue Antigens. 1996 Oct;48(4 Pt 1):278-84.

Specificity of two anti-class I HLA monoclonal antibodies that block class I
recognition by the NKB1 killer cell inhibitory receptor.

Gumperz JE(1), Paterson JC, Litwin V, Valiante N, Lanier LL, Parham P, Little AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, California,
USA.

Cytolysis by NK cells that possess the NKB1 killer cell inhibitory receptor is
inhibited by target cell expression of Bw4+ HLA-B molecules. The inhibitory
effect can be prevented by addition of mAbs which block recognition of class I
molecules by NKB1. The epitopes recognized by two anti-class I mAbs, DX15 and
DX16, which inhibit the interaction of NKB1 with class I have been characterized.
Binding of DX15 and DX16 to class I allotypes was investigated by flow cytometric
analysis of transfected cell lines which express just one HLA-A, B, or C allele, 
and by immunoprecipitation of class I molecules from HLA typed B-lymphoblastoid
cell lines, followed by isoelectric focusing. The DX16 mAb recognizes class I
allotypes which possess alanine at position 71 of the alpha 1 helix, and
therefore has a specificity resembling that of the ME1 mAb but with broader
specificity. Class I recognition by DX15 is affected by polymorphisms of the
C-terminal part of the alpha 1 helix, and the N-terminal part of the alpha 2
helix. DX15 thus appears to recognize a complex epitope near the end of the
peptide binding groove which may be conformationally determined. Both antibodies 
are as effective as the anti-NKB1 mAb (DX9) in preventing class I recognition by 
the NKB1 receptor. DX16 also blocked recognition by a B*0702 allospecific CTL
clone, whereas DX15 did not.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.1996.tb02646.x 
PMID: 8946681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

