
1. Endocr Res. 1996 Nov;22(4):631-9.

Adrenocortical-specific transgene expression directed by steroid hydroxylase gene
promoters.

Morley SD(1), Viard I, Parker KL, Mullins JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genome Research, University of Edinburgh, UK.

The 5'-flanking regions of genes for three mouse adrenal steroid hydroxylases
were analyzed for their ability to direct adrenal cortex-specific
beta-galactosidase (beta-gal) reporter expression both in cell culture and
transgenic mice. The 5'-flanking regions chosen were from the genes for steroid
21-hydroxylase (21-OHase), expressed throughout the adrenal cortex and mediating 
both glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid synthesis, and aldosterone synthetase
(AS) and steroid 11 beta-hydroxylase (11 beta-OHase), which catalyze respectively
the terminal steps of mineralocorticoid synthesis in the zona glomerulosa and
glucocorticoid synthesis in the zona fasciculata/reticularis. While 5.0 kb of 11 
beta-OHase gene 5'-flanking region and 5.4 kb of the AS gene 5'-flanking region
mediated respectively moderate and low levels of beta-gal reporter expression in 
Y1 adrenocortical tumor cells, neither of these 5'-flanking regions was able to
direct reporter expression to the appropriate adrenocortical zone of transgenic
mice. This suggests that additional regulatory elements, lying outside these
5'-flanking regions, are required for 11 beta-OHase and AS gene expression in the
intact mouse. In contrast, 6.4 kb of the mouse 21-OHase A gene 5' flanking region
was able to direct specific beta-galactosidase reporter expression, in both Y1
cells and transgenic mice, indicating that elements directing adrenal
cortex-specific gene expression in vivo are located not more than 6.4 kb 5' of
the 21-OHase gene transcription start site.

DOI: 10.1080/07435809609043757 
PMID: 8969922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

