
1. Alcohol Alcohol Suppl. 1994;2:157-62.

Ethanol metabolism in the gastrointestinal tract and its possible consequences.

Seitz HK(1), GÃ¤rtner U, Egerer G, Simanowski UA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Salem Medical Center, Heidelberg and
Paracelsus-Clinic, Bad Gandersheim, Germany.

Ethanol is oxidised not only in the liver, but also in the gastrointestinal
tract. Although this ethanol metabolism is less than that of the liver, it has
some important relevance with respect to the first pass metabolism of alcohol and
to ethanol induced tissue toxicity. In the gastrointestinal tract, ethanol can be
metabolised not only in the mucosal cell via alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and
microsomal ethanol oxidising system (MEOS), but also in a great variety of
bacteria. Depending on the gastrointestinal location, one or the other metabolic 
pathway of alcohol may be predominant. The metabolism of ethanol by gastric ADH, 
the so called first pass metabolism, influences ethanol blood concentrations not 
only in the portal vein and thus in the liver, but also in the systemic
circulation. As gastric ADH activity is decreased in younger women, in the
elderly, in the alcoholic, during fasting and after treatment with certain
H-2-receptor antagonists, increased blood ethanol concentrations may occur in
these situations after oral intake of ethanol. However, this first pass
metabolism of alcohol is influenced not only by ADH activity but also by the
speed of gastric emptying (e.g. slow gastric emptying leads to increased first
pass metabolism). Finally, gastric morphology also determines first pass
metabolism. Chronic atrophic gastritis and Helicobacter pylori associated gastric
injury lead to a decrease of gastric ADH activity, and thus possibly to a
decreased first pass metabolism of alcohol. In addition, the local production of 
acetaldehyde from ethanol in the oesophagus, where significantly more sigma-ADH
is present, may contribute to tissue injury and this may lead to the well known
ethanol associated oesophageal cancer development. Various isoenzymes of ADH
exist in the colorectum and they are also capable of producing acetaldehyde in
amounts sufficient to injure the mucosa. Besides ADH, the MEOS, a mixed function 
oxidase, also metabolises ethanol. This system is inducible by chronic alcohol
consumption and is involved in the metabolism of various xenobiotics including
drugs and procarcinogens. Thus, an increased activation of dietary procarcinogens
by this enzyme system may also contribute to carcinogenesis in the alcoholic.
Finally, a great variety of gastrointestinal bacteria are capable of metabolising
ethanol to acetaldehyde. This is possibly of major importance in the colorectum
where faecal bacteria, especially anaerobes in the rectum, can produce high
amounts of acetaldehyde, and this correlates with mucosal hyperregeneration
suggesting an acetaldehyde mediated mucosal damage.


PMID: 8974330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

