
1. Int J Cancer. 1997 Jan 6;70(1):112-9.

Mechanisms of escape from CD8+ T-cell clones specific for the HER-2/neu
proto-oncogene expressed in ovarian carcinomas: related and unrelated to
decreased MHC class 1 expression.

Kono K(1), Halapi E, Hising C, Petersson M, Gerdin E, Vanky F, Kiessling R.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

We have developed an in vitro model to study mechanisms by which ovarian tumor
cells that over-express the HER-2/neu proto-oncogene escape recognition by TCD8+.
Nine tumor-specific, HLA A2-restricted TCD8+ clones were isolated from 2 ovarian 
tumor-specific TCD8+ lines derived from tumor-infiltrating or -associated
lymphocytes. Of these, 2 clones recognized the previously defined HER-2/neu
epitope E75 (a.a. 369-377) and one recognized the C85 epitope (a.a. 971-979),
whereas the specificity of the remaining 6 clones was unknown. Three different
tumor escape variants (EVC8, EVC22 and EVC36) were produced by co-culturing an
ovarian tumor line over-expressing HER-2/neu with these autologous TCD8+ clones. 
Cell surface expression of HLA A2 was markedly decreased on all 3 escape
variants, relative to the parental tumor line, while no significant decrease in
their expression of the HER-2/neu, ICAM-1 or LFA-3 molecules was found. There was
a correlation between the level of tumor-specific recognition and HLA A2
expression among the tumor clones isolated from 2 of the escape variants (EVC8
and EVC36). In contrast, high HLA A2-expressing tumor clones isolated from the
EVC22 variant, or EVC22 which had regained high HLA A2 expression through
IFN-gamma treatment, were not recognized by the HER-2/neu-specific TCD8+ clone
C-22. No mutations were found in the cDNA or the genomic DNA derived from the PCR
product corresponding to a 496 bp fragment including the region coding for the
E75 epitope of the HER2/neu gene in the EVC22 variant. Collectively, this in
vitro model underlines the importance of decreased expression of the HLA
restriction element for escape from tumor-specific TCD8+ but also demonstrates
that additional mechanisms exist.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-0215(19970106)70:1<112::aid-ijc17>3.0.co;2-n 
PMID: 8985099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

