
1. Gene. 1996 Nov 7;179(1):9-19.

Bacterial resistances to toxic metal ions--a review.

Silver S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois at Chicago
60612-7344, USA. U20053@uicvm.uic.edu

Bacterial plasmids encode resistance systems for toxic metal ions, including Ag+,
AsO2-, AsO4(3-), Cd2+, Co2+, CrO4(2-), Cu2+, Hg2+, Ni2+, Pb2+, Sb3+, TeO3(2-),
Tl+ and Zn2+. The function of most resistance systems is based on the
energy-dependent efflux of toxic ions. Some of the efflux systems are ATPases and
others are chemiosmotic cation/proton antiporters. The Cd(2+)-resistance ATPase
of Gram-positive bacteria (CadA) is membrane cation pump homologous with other
bacterial, animal and plant P-type ATPases. CadA has been labeled with 32P from
[alpha-32P] ATP and drives ATP-dependent Cd2+ (and Zn2+) uptake by inside-out
membrane vesicles (equivalent to efflux from whole cells). Recently, isolated
genes defective in the human hereditary diseases of copper metabolism, namely
Menkes syndrome and Wilson's disease, encode P-type ATPases that are more similar
to bacterial CadA than to other ATPases from eukaryotes. The arsenic resistance
efflux system transports arsenite [As(III)], alternatively using either a
double-polypeptide (ArsA and ArsB) ATPase or a single-polypeptide (ArsB)
functioning as a chemiosmotic transporter. The third gene in the arsenic
resistance system, arsC, encodes an enzyme that converts intracellular arsenate
[As(V)] to arsenite [As(III)], the substrate of the efflux system. The
triple-polypeptide Czc (Cd2+, Zn2+ and Co2+) chemiosmotic efflux pump consists of
inner membrane (CzcA), outer membrane (CzcC) and membrane-spanning (CzcB)
proteins that together transport cations from the cytoplasm across the
periplasmic space to the outside of the cell.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(96)00323-x 
PMID: 8991852  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

