
1. J Rheumatol. 1995 Oct;22(10):1852-61.

Sharing of MHC haplotypes among patients with systemic lupus erythematosus from
unrelated Caucasian multicase families: disease association with the extended
haplotype [HLA-B8, SC01, DR17].

Truedsson L(1), Sturfelt G, Johansen P, Nived O, Thuresson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Lund University, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune rheumatic disease 
often clustered in families. We investigated the association between MHC
haplotypes and SLE in multicase Caucasian families.
METHODS: Ten consecutive families with 2 or more patients with SLE, in total 27
patients among 66 individuals, were studied. MHC haplotypes were determined by
typing for HLA-A, B, C, DR, and DQ by serological and DNA methods. Complotypes
were determined by protein typing and C4 gene polymorphism by DNA analysis.
RESULTS: Fifty-four independent MHC haplotypes were found. Ten of the 31
haplotypes in the patients with SLE were examples of the extended haplotype
[HLA-B8,SC01,DR17]. Six of these were found in 2 or more patients with SLE within
the same family. All the 14 SLE sib-pairs in the families shared at least one
haplotype and in 9 of the sib-pairs the shared haplotype was [HLA-B8,SCO1,DR17]. 
Three SLE associated haplotypes were [HLA-B7,SC31,DR15]. Four of the 27 patients 
with SLE were C4A deficient. Two C2 deficient siblings were homozygous for the
haplotype [HLA-B18,S042,DR15].
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that a very limited number of MHC haplotypes are
associated with familial SLE. The haplotype [HLA-B8,SCO1,DR17] was closely
related with the disease. There was no evidence suggesting familial SLE
constitutes a disease subset. Determination of MHC haplotypes in multicase
families is of value for assessment of disease susceptibility.


PMID: 8991981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

