
1. J Immunol. 1997 Jan 15;158(2):574-9.

Homing potentials of circulating lymphocytes in humans depend on the site of
activation: oral, but not parenteral, typhoid vaccination induces circulating
antibody-secreting cells that all bear homing receptors directing them to the
gut.

Kantele A(1), Kantele JM, Savilahti E, Westerholm M, Arvilommi H, Lazarovits A,
Butcher EC, Mäkelä PH.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.

Specific Ab-secreting cells (ASC) appear in the human blood as a response to oral
and parenteral vaccination. The actual contribution of these cells to the defense
of the body depends on their final effector site. The homing potentials of
mucosally and parenterally induced ASC were compared by examining the homing
receptor (HR) expression of circulating specific ASC in the blood of volunteers
vaccinated orally or parenterally with the same Ag, Salmonella typhi Ty21a.
Circulating lymphocytes were separated into receptor-positive and -negative
populations, and the numbers of specific ASC were assayed. The alpha4 beta7
integrin, which acts as a gut HR, was expressed on all (99%) of the mucosally
activated ASC, but on only 58% of the parenterally induced ASC or 58% of all
Ig-secreting cells of the unvaccinated controls. L-selectin, the peripheral lymph
node HR, showed an inverse distribution; it was found on 42% of mucosally
activated ASC and on 86% of parenterally induced ASC. These results reveal that
all of the circulating ASC after oral vaccination are committed to migrate to the
mucosal compartment of the immune system, strongly arguing for a recirculation of
activated mucosal cells in humans. By contrast, ASC induced by parenteral
vaccination with the same Ag are mostly directed to the systemic compartment, yet
a part of them has mucosal homing attitudes as well. These differences indicate
that the site of Ag encounter determines the homing potential of the cell.


PMID: 8992970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

