
1. Tissue Antigens. 1996 Dec;48(6):645-50.

Significance of antibodies to streptococcal M protein in psoriatic arthritis and 
their association with HLA-A*0207.

Muto M(1), Date Y, Ichimiya M, Moriwaki Y, Mori K, Kamikawaji N, Kimura A,
Sasazuki T, Asagami C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Ube,
Japan.

Psoriatic arthritis (PA) is an immune disease associated with HLA-A2 in the
Japanese population. To investigate mechanisms the association between HLA-A2 and
PA, we examined in vivo immune responsiveness to Streptococcus pyogenes.
Recombinant M proteins for the subtype specific N-terminal half (AB region) and
conserved C-terminal half (C region) were produced separately. IgG antibody level
against each region was measured by ELISA in 31 PA patients, 88 patients with
psoriasis vulgaris, 6 patients with rheumatoid arthritis and 77 healthy controls.
We found that IgG antibody levels against the C region were markedly higher in
the PA patient group than in the other disease groups or controls. Further, IgG
antibody levels were higher in PA patients with spondylitis and polyarticular
arthritis than in PA patients with rheumatoid-like arthritis and arthritis
mutilans. In contrast, no significant difference in the IgG antibody levels
against the AB region was observed among the tested groups. HLA-A2 DNA typing
showed that HLA-A*0207 was associated with PA (RR = 17.6; pcorr < 0.01) and the
IgG antibody responses to the C region correlated well with the presence of
HLA-A*0207. These results suggest that streptococcal infection may be involved in
the pathogenesis of PA by participating in the HLA-linked immune responsiveness.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.1996.tb02687.x 
PMID: 9008306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

