
1. Biochemistry. 1997 Jan 21;36(3):461-8.

Escherichia coli RNA polymerase activity observed using atomic force microscopy.

Kasas S(1), Thomson NH, Smith BL, Hansma HG, Zhu X, Guthold M, Bustamante C, Kool
ET, Kashlev M, Hansma PK.

Author information: 
(1)Physics Department, University of California Santa Barbara 93106, USA.

Fluid tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to observe Escherichia 
coli RNA polymerase (RNAP) transcribing two different linear double-stranded (ds)
DNA templates. The transcription process was detected by observing the
translocation of the DNA template by RNAP on addition of ribonucleoside
5'-triphosphates (NTPs) in sequential AFM images. Stalled ternary complexes of
RNAP, dsDNA and nascent RNA were adsorbed onto a mica surface and imaged under
continuously flowing buffer. On introduction of all four NTPs, we observed some
DNA molecules being pulled through the RNAP, some dissociating from the RNAP and 
others which did not move relative to the RNAP. The transcription rates were
observed to be approximately 0.5-2 bases/s at our NTP concentrations,
approximately 5 microM. The RNA transcripts were not unambiguously imaged in
fluid. However, in experiments using a small single-stranded (ss) circular DNA
template, known as a rolling circle, transcripts up to 1 or 2 microns long could 
be observed with tapping mode AFM once the samples were dried and imaged in air. 
This confirmed our observations of the transcriptional activity of RNAP adsorbed 
onto mica. This work illustrates that the development of tapping-mode in fluid
has made it possible to use AFM to follow biological processes at the molecular
level and get new insights about the variability of activity of individual
molecules bound to a surface.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9624402 
PMID: 9012661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

