
1. J Bacteriol. 1997 Feb;179(4):1013-22.

Genetic characterization of the pdu operon: use of 1,2-propanediol in Salmonella 
typhimurium.

Walter D(1), Ailion M, Roth J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Salmonella typhimurium is able to catabolize 1,2-propanediol for use as the sole 
carbon and energy source; the first enzyme of this pathway requires the cofactor 
adenosyl cobalamin (Ado-B12). Surprisingly, Salmonella can use propanediol as the
sole carbon source only in the presence of oxygen but can synthesize Ado-B12 only
anaerobically. To understand this situation, we have studied the pdu operon,
which encodes proteins for propanediol degradation. A set of pdu mutants
defective in aerobic degradation of propanediol (with exogenous vitamin B12)
defines four distinct complementation groups. Mutations in two of these groups
(pduC and pduD) eliminate propanediol dehydratase activity. Based on mutant
phenotypes, a third complementation group (pduG) appears to encode a cobalamin
adenosyl transferase activity. No function has been assigned to the pduJ
complementation group. Propionaldehyde dehydrogenase activity is eliminated by
mutations in any of the four identified complementation groups, suggesting that
this activity may require a complex of proteins encoded by the operon. None of
the mutations analyzed affects either of the first two genes of the operon (pduA 
and pduB), which were identified by DNA sequence analysis. Available data suggest
that the pdu operon includes enough DNA for about 15 genes and that the four
genetically identified genes are the only ones required for aerobic use of
propanediol.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.179.4.1013-1022.1997 
PMCID: PMC178792
PMID: 9023178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

