
1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 21;272(8):4843-9.

Cooperativity and dimerization of recombinant human estrogen receptor
hormone-binding domain.

Brandt ME(1), Vickery LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of California, Irvine,
California 92697, USA. mdbrandt@uci.edu

The estrogen receptor dimerizes and exhibits cooperative ligand binding as part
of its normal functioning. Interaction of the estrogen receptor with its ligands 
is mediated by a C-terminal hormone-binding domain (HBD), and residues within the
HBD are thought to contribute to dimerization. To examine dimer interactions in
the isolated HBD, a human estrogen receptor HBD fragment was expressed in high
yield as a cleavable fusion protein in Escherichia coli. The isolated HBD peptide
exhibited affinity for estradiol, ligand discrimination, and cooperative
estradiol binding (Hill coefficient approximately 1.6) similar to the full-length
protein. Circular dichroism spectroscopy suggests that the HBD contains
significant amounts of alpha-helix ( approximately 60%) and some beta-strand (
approximately 7%) and that ligand binding induces little change in secondary
structure. HBD dimer dissociation, measured using size exclusion chromatography, 
exhibited a half-life of approximately 1.2 h, which ligand binding increased
approximately 3-fold (estradiol) to approximately 4-fold (4-hydroxytamoxifen).
These results suggest that the isolated estrogen receptor HBD dimerizes and
undergoes conformational changes associated with cooperative ligand binding in a 
manner comparable to the full-length protein, and that one effect of ligand
binding is to alter the receptor dimer dissociation kinetics.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.8.4843 
PMID: 9030541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

