
1. Laryngorhinootologie. 1996 Oct;75(10):580-3.

[Effect of postoperative endonasal mucous membrane care on nasal bacterial flora:
prospective study of 2 irrigation methods with NaCl solution after paranasal
sinus surgery].

[Article in German]

Johannssen V(1), Maune S, Erichsen H, Hedderich H, Werner JA.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Hals-, Nasen- und Ohrenheilkunde, Kopf- und Hals-chirurgie der
Universität, Kiel.

BACKGROUND: Endonasal irrigation with saline solution is a widely used
constituent of mucosal care after sinus surgery. This procedure could explain a
repeatedly observed phenomenon: contamination of the endonasal mucosa by
facultative skin pathogens from the palm during paranasal sinus irrigation.
METHOD: For this reason the effect of nasal rinses with saline solution on the
endonasal bacterial flora was investigated (use of so-called nasal douche
[Siemens & Co., Bad Ems] compared to rinsing by hand). In 36 patients (23 m., 13 
f., 36 +/- 19.5 years of age) with chronic sinusitis, a total of 288 swabs was
collected before, during, and after surgery. The collected specimens were
transferred to a Port-A-Cul transport medium and processed within four hours.
RESULTS: Two hundred sixty-six cultures of 325 bacterial strains were aerobic
(82%), while 59 were anaerobic (18%). Staphylococcus aureus (33%) and
representatives of the Enterobacteriaceae family (31%) were the most common
enriched germs. The number of times that enterobacteriaceae could be isolated was
significantly (p < 0.05) lower (13%) when a nasal douche was used than when
irrigation was done using the palm (38%). An irrigation technique-related effect 
was found on neither the spectrum of the pathagonic organisms nor the wound
healing process.
CONCLUSION: The frequent isolation of enterobacteria in nasal swabs of
individuals rinsing by hand constitutes the difference between irrigation by
nasal douche and by hand in the postoperative care of the endonasal mucosa. These
pathogens can sustain the paranasal sinus system.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-997638 
PMID: 9035660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

