
1. Scand J Immunol. 1997 Feb;45(2):203-12.

IL-4 synergizes with IL-10 and anti-CD40 MoAbs to induce B-cell differentiation
in patients with common variable immunodeficiency.

Punnonen J(1), Kainulainen L, Ruuskanen O, Nikoskelainen J, Arvilommi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Turku University, Finland.

In the present study the phenotype and function of lymphocytes from patients with
common variable immunodeficiency (CVI) were studied. Five out of 12 patients had 
abnormally low proportion of CD4+ T cells, but PBMC of these patients were
capable of proliferating in response to polyclonal T-cell mitogens or PPD
antigen. The phenotype of patients' B cells, as determined by expression of CD10,
CD19 and CD34, was comparable to that of healthy controls. IL-4 and anti-CD40
MoAbs induced moderate B-cell differentiation in PBMC derived from patients with 
CVI, but the frequencies of Ig-secreting cells were generally at levels
spontaneously observed in healthy controls. IL-10 was completely ineffective in
inducing IgG-secreting cells in cultures of PBMC derived from patients with CVI
even in the presence of anti-CD40 MoAbs, whereas high frequencies of Ig-secreting
cells were induced under similar condition in cultures of PBMC derived from
healthy controls. Importantly, when IL-4 was added to cultures stimulated with
anti-CD40 MoAbs and IL-10, a very strong synergistic effect on the numbers of
Ig-secreting cells and the levels of Ig secretion was observed in PBMC from both 
patients and controls. Moreover, the frequencies of Ig-secreting cells after
activation with anti-CD40 MoAbs, IL-4 plus IL-10 in PBMC from some patients were 
comparable to those observed in PBMC from healthy controls. Taken together, these
results indicate that B cells from patients with CVI have impaired capacity to
differentiate into Ig-secreting cells in response to IL-10 and anti-CD40 MoAbs,
and that this unresponsiveness can be restored by exogenous IL-4 in a proportion 
of the patients.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3083.1997.d01-381.x 
PMID: 9042433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

