
1. Arch Microbiol. 1997 Apr;167(4):209-16.

Effect of chelating agents and respiratory inhibitors on regulation of the cadA
gene in Escherichia coli.

Reams SG(1), Lee N, Mat-Jan F, Clark DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL
62901, USA.

The cadA gene that encodes lysine decarboxylase in Escherichia coli is induced by
low pH and - during anaerobic growth - by the substrate, lysine. We used operon
fusions of cadA to lacZ to investigate the effects of aeration on cadA
regulation. When an insertion mutation in osmZ (= hns) was introduced, a
cadA-lacZ fusion was derepressed in the presence of air to approximately the same
level as seen during anaerobic growth. However, the pH-dependent regulation of
cadA was not affected by osmZ. Introduction of mutations in rpoS, fur, or fnr had
no significant effect on cadA expression. However, defects in arcB or arcA
largely abolished expression of cadA during anaerobic growth. Nonetheless,
strains defective in both arcB and osmZ showed the same high cadA-lac expression 
in air as seen in the single osmZ derivatives. Blocking the respiratory chain
with mutations or chemical inhibitors also caused derepression of a cadA-lacZ
fusion in air, while agents affecting the proton gradient had no effect.
Derepression of cadA in air was also mediated by several chelating agents, in
particular by methoxyindole carboxylic acid. Addition of Fe2+ overcame this
effect. Chelating agents also abolished the expression during aerobic growth of
several genes known to be under arcAB control and which are normally repressed
during anaerobic growth but induced in the presence of air. This implies that the
effect of chelating agents on cadA expression is mediated via the arcAB
regulatory system.

DOI: 10.1007/s002030050437 
PMID: 9075621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

