
1. J Can Dent Assoc. 1997 Mar;63(3):196-201.

Oral malodor: philosophical and practical aspects.

Bosy A.

Although oral malodor or bad breath is an unpleasant condition experienced by
most individuals, it typically results in transient discomfort. At least 50 per
cent of the population suffer from chronic oral malodor, however, and
approximately half of these individuals experience a severe problem that creates 
personal discomfort and social embarrassment. The mouth air of chronic malodor
sufferers is tainted with compounds such as hydrogen sulphide, methyl mercaptan
and organic acids, which produce a stream of foul air that is gravely offensive
to the people in their vicinity. Sufferers often make desperate attempts to mask 
their oral malodor with mints and chewing gum, compulsive brushing, and
repeatedly rinsing with commercial mouthwashes. While dental diseases have been
strongly associated with this condition, there is considerable evidence that
dentally healthy individuals can exhibit significant levels of mouth odor.
Proteolytic activity by microorganisms residing on the tongue and teeth results
in foul-smelling compounds, and is the most common cause of oral malodor. A
specialized device called the halimeter is available to measure the volatile
sulphur compounds in mouth air. Many of the manufacturers of bad breath remedies 
claim that their products contain antibacterial mechanisms with sufficient
strength to control oral malodor over long periods of time. None, however,
effectively eliminate the problem. Interest in oral malodor research and clinical
treatment has increased in the last few years, and this distressing problem is
finally getting the attention it deserves.


PMID: 9086681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

