
1. Semin Liver Dis. 1997 Feb;17(1):71-8.

Autoantibodies against "nuclear dots" in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Szostecki C(1), Guldner HH, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institu für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie,
Universität Hamburg, Germany.

Autoantibodies against nuclear proteins are not always but rather frequently
present in sera of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). The specificity
and diagnostic value of these autoantibodies for PBC have only recently become
clear through cloning of the cDNA of some of the corresponding autoantigens which
allowed the establishment of immunological assays with recombinant autoantigens
expressed in E. coli and eukaryotic cells. In this report we summarize primarily 
the knowledge on the structure and putative function of two nuclear autoantigens,
the Sp100 and PML proteins, which are present in so-called nuclear dots (NDs) and
against which autoantibodies are present in a subpopulation of PBC patients.
Furthermore, the type of autoimmune response (epitope specificity and
immunoglobulin class) against both the Sp100 and PML proteins and the specificity
of the anti-Sp100 and anti-PML autoantibodies for PBC patients and patients with 
other autoimmune diseases is reviewed. Current knowledge clearly indicates that
determination of anti-Sp100 and anti-PML autoantibodies substantially improves
diagnosis of PBC as these autoantibodies are highly specific for this disease
even when autoantibodies against mitochondrial antigens, a hallmark of most PBC
patients, are not found. The type of autoimmune response against the Sp100 and
PML proteins also provides some clues about possible mechanisms which lead to
autoantigenicity of both proteins.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-1007184 
PMID: 9089912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

