
1. J Exp Med. 1997 Mar 17;185(6):1143-8.

Epinephrine exerts anticoagulant effects during human endotoxemia.

van der Poll T(1), Levi M, Dentener M, Jansen PM, Coyle SM, Braxton CC, Buurman
WA, Hack CE, ten Cate JW, Lowry SF.

Author information: 
(1)Cornell University Medical College, Department of Surgery, New York 10021,
USA.

To determine the effect of a physiologically relevant elevation in the plasma
concentrations of epinephrine on the activation of the hemostatic mechanism
during endotoxemia, 17 healthy men were studied after intravenous injection of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 2 ng/kg), while receiving a continuous infusion of
epinephrine (30 ng/kg/min) started either 3 h (n = 5) or 24 h (n = 6) before LPS 
injection, or an infusion of normal saline (n = 6). Activation of the coagulation
system (plasma concentrations of thrombin-antithrombin III complexes and
prothrombin fragment F1+2) was significantly attenuated in the groups treated
with epinephrine when compared with subjects injected with LPS only (P <0.05).
Epinephrine enhanced LPS-induced activation of fibrinolysis (plasma levels of
tissue-type plasminogen activator and plasmin-alpha2-antiplasmin complexes; P
<0.05), but did not influence inhibition of fibrinolysis (plasminogen activator
inhibitor type I). In subjects infused with epinephrine, the ratio of maximal
activation of coagulation and maximal activation of fibrinolysis was reduced by
>50%. Hence, epinephrine exerts antithrombotic effects during endotoxemia by
concurrent inhibition of coagulation, and stimulation of fibrinolysis.
Epinephrine, whether endogenously produced or administered as a component of
treatment, may limit the development of disseminated intravascular coagulation
during systemic infection.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.185.6.1143 
PMCID: PMC2196238
PMID: 9091588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

