
1. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Mar 15;244(3):706-12.

Molecular cloning and characterization of beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase
expressed in mouse testis.

Uehara K(1), Muramatsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Nagoya University School of Medicine, Showa-ku,
Japan.

Using an affinity-purified antibody against beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase
purified from F9 embryonal carcinoma cells, we screened a lambda gt11 expression 
library constructed from the same cell line. The cDNA clone obtained encoded a
46-kDa protein. Among adult mouse organs, the testis was found to express large
amounts of the corresponding mRNA. An antibody against the 46-kDa protein was
raised in a rabbit by immunization with a maltose-binding-protein fusion protein 
produced in Escherichia coli. The affinity-purified antibody against the cloned
46-kDa protein reacted with a 59-kDa protein in sperm extract on western
blotting. Among the proteins in the F9 beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase
preparation, which were mostly 68-kDa and 59-kDa species, 59-kDa and 50-kDa bands
reacted with the antibody against the cloned 46-kDa protein. The cloned 46-kDa
protein had type-II transmembrane topology and some blocks of sequence similarity
with the known beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase. Furthermore, predicted secondary
structures were similar over large portions of the two proteins. The
histidine-tagged 46-kDa protein produced in E. coli was partially adsorbed onto a
N-acetylglucosamine-Affi-Gel column and eluted by 20 mM N-acetylglucosamine. The 
histidine-tagged 46-kDa protein, which was purified to homogeneity, had a small, 
but significant amount of beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase activity. These results 
strongly suggest that the 46-kDa protein is a beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.00706.x 
PMID: 9108238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

