
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2605-14.

Regulation of the interleukin-2 CD28-responsive element by NF-ATp and various
NF-kappaB/Rel transcription factors.

Maggirwar SB(1), Harhaj EW, Sun SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey Medical Center, 17033, USA.

The CD28 costimulatory signal enhances antigen-mediated induction of
interleukin-2 (IL-2) gene transcription through activation of an enhancer termed 
the CD28-responsive element (CD28RE). Although various nuclear proteins have been
shown to bind to CD28RE, their in vivo functions in the regulation of this
enhancer remain elusive. In this report, we show that CD28RE binds distinct
transcription factors in cells treated with different mitogenic stimuli.
Stimulation of the T-cell receptor (TCR) complex in the absence of a CD28
costimulatory signal induces a member of the nuclear factor of the activated T
cells, NF-ATp; however, this treatment fails to activate the CD28RE enhancer
activity. Significant activation of CD28RE was detected when the cells were
treated with both the TCR stimulators and an anti-CD28 monoclonal antibody
(anti-CD28), which induces the NF-kappaB/Rel enhancer binding proteins in
addition to NF-ATp. The costimulatory activity of anti-CD28 can be further
enhanced by a phorbol ester. Kinetic analyses demonstrate that activation of
endogenous IL-2 gene transcription is correlated with the binding of CD28RE by
NF-ATp and different NF-kappaB/Rel species. Transient-transfection studies reveal
that expression of either NF-ATp or the p50-RelA NF-kappaB heterodimer leads to
the potent transactivation of both the CD28RE enhancer and the intact IL-2
promoter in mitogen-stimulated cells. Remarkably, coexpression of these two
families of enhancer-binding proteins in Jurkat T cells results in the
transactivation of the CD28RE enhancer even in the absence of any cellular
stimuli. Together, these results suggest that activation of IL-2 gene
transcription by the TCR- and CD28-mediated signals involves the interaction of
CD28RE with NF-ATp and various NF-kappaB/Rel transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.17.5.2605 
PMCID: PMC232110
PMID: 9111330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

