
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 May 15;25(10):1920-9.

A truncation in the 14 kDa protein of the signal recognition particle leads to
tertiary structure changes in the RNA and abolishes the elongation arrest
activity of the particle.

Thomas Y(1), Bui N, Strub K.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de Genève, Sciences III,
CH-1211 Genève 4, Switzerland.

The signal recognition particle (SRP) provides the molecular link between
synthesis of polypeptides and their concomitant translocation into the
endoplasmic reticulum. During targeting, SRP arrests or delays elongation of the 
nascent chain, thereby presumably ensuring a high translocation efficiency.
Components of the Alu domain, SRP9/14 and the Alu sequences of SRP RNA, have been
suggested to play a role in the elongation arrest function of SRP. We generated a
truncated SRP14 protein, SRP14-20C, which forms, together with SRP9, a stable
complex with SRP RNA. However, particles reconstituted with SRP9/14-20C,
RC(9/14-20C), completely lack elongation arrest activity. RC(9/14-20C) particles 
have intact signal recognition, targeting and ribosome binding activities.
SRP9/14-20C therefore only impairs interactions with the ribosome that are
required to effect elongation arrest. This result provides evidence that direct
interactions between the Alu domain components and the ribosome are required for 
this function. Furthermore, SRP9/14-20C binding to SRP RNA results in tertiary
structure changes in the RNA. Our results strongly indicate that these changes
account for the negative effect of SRP14 truncation on elongation arrest, thus
revealing a critical role of the RNA in this function.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/25.10.1920 
PMCID: PMC146678
PMID: 9115358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

