
1. J Immunol. 1997 May 1;158(9):4088-96.

Effects of blocking B7-1 and B7-2 interactions during a type 2 in vivo immune
response.

Greenwald RJ(1), Lu P, Halvorson MJ, Zhou X, Chen S, Madden KB, Perrin PJ, Morris
SC, Finkelman FD, Peach R, Linsley PS, Urban JF Jr, Gause WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

The costimulatory signal provided to T cells through CD28/CTLA-4 interactions is 
required for in vivo Th cell effector function associated with cytokine
production. However, it is uncertain whether the two well-characterized ligands
for these molecules, B7-1 and B7-2, differentially influence the consequent
development of a type 1 or a type 2 primary response. We have examined the in
vivo effects of blocking B7-1 and/or B7-2 ligand interactions on the type 2
mucosal immune response that follows oral infection of mice with the nematode
parasite, Heligmosomoides polygyrus. Administration of the combination of
anti-B7-1 and anti-B7-2 Abs inhibited H. polygyrus-induced increases in serum
IgG1 and IgE levels, the expansion of mesenteric lymph node (MLN) germinal
centers, in situ CD4+ T cell expansion, elevated blood eosinophils, and increased
intestinal mucosal mast cells. Similarly, both Abs blocked MLN and Peyer's patch 
cytokine gene expression and elevations in MLN T cell-derived IL-4 protein
secretion. However, in the same experiments, administration of either anti-B7-1
or anti-B7-2 Abs alone had little effect on any of these parameters. T cell and B
cell activation was also blocked by the combination of anti-B7-2 and a
B7-1-specific mutant Y100F CTLA-4Ig construct. These results suggest that to the 
extent that anti-B7-1 and anti-B7-2 mAbs block B7 interactions, either B7-1 or
B7-2 ligand interactions can provide the required costimulatory signals that lead
to T cell effector function during a type 2 in vivo immune response.


PMID: 9126967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

