
1. Mech Ageing Dev. 1997 Mar;94(1-3):7-16.

Evidence of enhanced type 2 immune response and impaired upregulation of a type 1
response in frail elderly nursing home residents.

Castle S(1), Uyemura K, Wong W, Modlin R, Effros R.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Center (GRECC), VAMC West, Los Angeles, CA 90073, USA.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of frail elderly nursing home residents
had significantly higher PHA-induced interleukin-10 (IL-10) production compared
to PBMC's from young control subjects. No correlation was observed between IL-10 
production and interleukin-12 (IL-12) p40 production, proliferative response or
with the proportion of CD28-negative T cells. To better characterize the host
response to a ubiquitous pathogen, the dose response and time-dependent (kinetic)
production of IL-10 and IL-12 p40 of PBMC stimulated with Staphylococcus aureus
Cowan (SAC) was studied. IL-10 production continued to increase at 48 h, while
IL-12 p40 levels declined or remained stable, in both young and elderly subjects.
In analyzing how excessive IL-10 production might influence antigen presenting
cell functions, IL-12 was markedly inhibited by recombinant IL-10 (rIL-10), while
anti-IL-10 enhances IL-12 p40 production in cultures from young controls; but the
PBMC cultured from an elderly cohort were not able to generate similar absolute
levels of IL-12 p40 even in the presence of anti-IL-10. These preliminary data
suggest that there may be both over production of IL-10 in some individuals, as
well an an impaired ability to upregulate a T Helper 1 (type 1) reaction. These
age-related changes could even be more dramatic at the tissue level and
contribute to the impaired delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) and failed host
defense to infection, such as to primary and reactivation tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0047-6374(96)01821-0 
PMID: 9147356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

