
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1997 Apr;35(4):839-42.

Determination of anti-streptolysin O antibody titer by a new passive
agglutination method using sensitized toraysphere particles.

Kodama T(1), Ichiyama S, Morishita Y, Fukatsu T, Shimokata K, Nakashima N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Nagoya University Hospital, Japan.

Comment in
    J Clin Microbiol. 1999 Jun;37(6):2120.

We developed a new method for determining the anti-streptolysin O (ASO) titer on 
the basis of a passive agglutination reaction. This new method uses Toraysphere
particles sensitized with streptolysin O. This method was used to measure the ASO
titer in 130 serum samples (from 31 patients with post-streptococcal
glomerulonephritis, 26 patients with group A streptococcal pharyngitis, 5
patients with scarlet fever, 29 patients with non-group A streptococcal
pharyngitis, 20 healthy children, and 19 healthy adults). The results were
compared with those obtained simultaneously by two conventional methods, the
Rantz-Randall and the NA-Latex-ASL methods. The results obtained by the
Toraysphere method showed an excellent correlation with those obtained by each
conventional method (correlation coefficients, 0.932 for the Rantz-Randall method
and 0.913 for the NA-Latex-ASL method). The performance of each method was
evaluated with respect to the clinical and microbiological diagnoses for each
patient. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative
predictive value for the Toraysphere method were 76, 84, 81, and 79%,
respectively. The corresponding values for the Rantz-Randall method were 48, 78, 
67, and 62%, respectively, while those for the NA-Latex-ASL method were 60, 82,
76, and 69%, respectively. Because the Toraysphere method is simple and
reproducible, has a short reaction time, and has a clear-cut endpoint for the
analysis, we recommend it for routine use in determining the ASO titer in the
clinical microbiology laboratory.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.35.4.839-842.1997 
PMCID: PMC229686
PMID: 9157138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

