
1. Rev Med Chil. 1996 Aug;124(8):950-8.

[Management of patients with severe pneumonia in mechanical ventilation:
usefulness of bronchoalveolar lavage].

[Article in Spanish]

Saldías F(1), Blacutt M, Moreno R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Enfernedades Respiratorias, Universidad Católica de Chile,
Santiago de Chile.

Bacterial pneumonia is a frequent complication in patients requiring mechanical
ventilation (9-21%) and carries a significant mortality. The optimal management
of these patients remains controversial. Some investigators have advocated
invasive diagnostic testing using bronchoscopic techniques.AIM: To asses the
diagnostic value of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) in patients with suspicion of
bacterial pneumonia in mechanical ventilation.
PATIENTS: We evaluated 73 community-acquired pneumonia and 94 nosocomial
pneumonia in critically ill and mechanically ventilated patients.
RESULTS: The mortality was 50% (82 patients) and the principal death's cause was 
pulmonary sepsis (90%). 157 subjects received antibiotics before the
microbiologic exam (94%) and 30 patients had multiple organ failure (MOF).
Seventy of 167 BAL culture samples demonstrated microbial growth of > 10(4)
cfu/ml (sensitivity: 41.9%). BAL culture samples isolated gram-positive cocci in 
27 cases (39%), aerobic gram-negative bacilli in 39 cases (57%) and P carinii in 
3 cases (4%). Correlation between BAL culture and hemocultive results was very
insignificant. Prognosis of community-acquired pneumonia and nosocomial pneumonia
were very bad in both cases. Mortality of patients with MOF (73%) was higher than
patients without MOF (44.8%), (p < 0.01). Mortality was similar in patients with 
BAL culture positive (48.6%) and negative (49.5%). The mortality rate of severe
pneumonia in MV was very elevated and the BAL culture results didn't affect
significantly the survival.


PMID: 9196995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

