
1. Biochemistry. 1997 Jun 17;36(24):7425-31.

Insertion of Argos sequences into the B-loop of epidermal growth factor results
in a low-affinity ligand with strong agonistic activity.

van de Poll ML(1), van Vugt MJ, Lenferink AE, van Zoelen EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
mvdpoll@sci.kun.nl

Erratum in
    Biochemistry 1997 Sep 23;36(38):11542.

Recently, it has been shown that the activation of the Drosophila EGF receptor
(DER) by its natural ligand Spitz is inhibited by Argos [Schweitzer, R., et al.
(1995) Nature 376, 699-702]. Argos and Spitz both have an EGF-like domain which
in the case of Argos differs from that of Spitz and other EGF receptor agonists
in that it has an extended B-loop of 20 amino acids instead of 10 amino acids
which in addition contains an unusual cluster of charged residues. To investigate
whether B-loop sequences are an important determinant for receptor activation and
play a causal role in the antagonistic activity of Argos, three human (h)EGF
mutants were constructed in which amino acids derived from the Argos B-loop were 
introduced. In one mutant (E3A4E/B10), replacement of four amino acids in the
B-loop of hEGF (123, E24, D27, and K28) by the corresponding Argos residues
neither altered the binding affinity of the growth factor for the hEGF receptor
nor did it change its ability to induce a mitogenic response. Insertion of 2
additional Argos residues (E3A4E/B12) or extension of the B-loop by 10 amino
acids (E3A4E/B20) resulted, however, in a significant loss of binding affinity.
In spite of this, both E3A4E/B12 and E3A4E/B20 appeared to be strong agonists for
the hEGF receptor with similar dose-response curves for mitogenic activity and
MAPK activation as wild-type hEGF. These data show that several nonconservative
substitutions in the hEGF B-loop are tolerated without affecting receptor binding
or activation. Furthermore, they show that receptor binding and receptor
signaling efficiency can be uncoupled which is a prerequisite for the development
of receptor antagonists.

DOI: 10.1021/bi970227f 
PMID: 9200690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

