
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1997 Jun;19(12):1175-81.

GM-CSF-mobilized peripheral blood CD34+ cells differ from steady-state bone
marrow CD34+ cells in adhesion molecule expression.

Watanabe T(1), Dave B, Heimann DG, Lethaby E, Kessinger A, Talmadge JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology/Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha 68198-5660, USA.

To determine the effect of growth factor mobilization on the expression of
adhesion molecules, we compared CD34+ progenitor cell (PC) populations from
steady-state bone marrow (BM) with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF)-mobilized apheresis products (peripheral blood stem cell (PSC))
using flow cytometry. To increase the accuracy of this analysis, CD34+ cells were
enriched (MiniMACS) before cytometric analysis. A significantly lower expression 
of very late antigen-4 (VLA-4), leukocyte function antigen-1 (LFA-1) and LFA-3
were observed on PSC compared to BM CD34+ cells. In addition, significantly lower
mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of VLA-4, VLA-5, intercellular adhesion
molecule-1 (ICAM-1), and sialyl Lewisx were observed on PSC as compared to BM
CD34+ cells. Significantly higher levels of L-selectin and CD44 expression were
observed on PSC as compared to BM CD34+ cells based on frequency and MFI (P < or 
= 0.05). In addition, the duration of GM-CSF administration or number of prior
aphereses had no effect on adhesion molecule expression. These data suggest that 
decreased expression of adhesion molecules including VLA-4, LFA-1, ICAM-1 and
LFA-3 play a role in PC mobilization. Based on these studies, we suggest that PC 
mobilization occurs as a stochastic process and is associated with the selection 
of CD34+ cells with low adhesion molecule expression.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1700814 
PMID: 9208110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

