
1. Eur J Immunol. 1997 Jun;27(6):1413-21.

Differential response of CD4+ V7+ and CD4+ V7- T cells to T cell
receptor-dependent signals: CD4+ V7+ T cells are co-stimulation independent and
anti-V7 antibody blocks the induction of anergy by bacterial superantigen.

Soares LR(1), Rivas A, Ruegg C, Engleman EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 94305,
USA.

V7 is a novel cell surface glycoprotein that is expressed on 25% of circulating T
lymphocytes. This molecule appears to play a critical role in T cell activation
based on the observation that a monoclonal anti-V7 antibody inhibits T cell
receptor (TCR)-dependent interleukin-2 (IL-2) production and proliferation of T
cells. In the current study, CD4+ V7+ and CD4+ V7- T cells were separated from
one another and their response to various stimuli analyzed. Although there were
only minor differences between the two subsets in the expression of
activation/differentiation markers, including CD45RA and R0 isotypes, when
exposed to immobilized anti-CD3 or anti-TCR antibodies in the absence of APC,
CD4+ V7+ T cells alone produced IL-2 and proliferated vigorously. By contrast,
CD4+ V7- cells responded poorly to such stimuli, but they recovered their
capacity to respond if antigen-presenting cells (APC) or anti-CD28-antibody were 
added to the cultures. The enhancement of the V7- T cell response by APC appears 
to be related to augmentation of TCR signals because the effect could be blocked 
by antibodies against molecules on APC [major histocompatibility (MHC) class II, 
CD86] that are known to up-regulate such signals through their interaction with
counter-receptors on T cells. To assess the role of V7 in a system independent of
co-stimulation, CD4+ T cells were stimulated with the bacterial superantigens,
staphylococcal enterotoxins A and B. The cells responded by proliferating and
then becoming anergic. Addition of anti-V7 antibody at the initiation of culture 
with superantigen did not inhibit cellular proliferation but prevented T cells
from becoming anergic, while addition of anti-CD28 antibody had no effect on
either proliferation or anergy induction. These results indicate that V7 and CD28
mediate distinct intracellular signals and suggest that V7 functions to preserve 
T cell reactivity whether the stimulus is mitogenic or anergizing.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830270618 
PMID: 9209493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

