
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 1997 May;18(1):17-30.

Hyporesponsiveness of inflamed human gingival fibroblasts from patients with
chronic periodontal diseases against cell surface components of Porphyromonas
gingivalis.

Ogawa T(1), Ozaki A, Shimauchi H, Uchida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology, Osaka University Faculty of Dentistry, Suita,
Japan.

Inflamed human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) of patients with chronic periodontal
diseases have less active interleukin-8 (IL-8) production compared with normal
HGF of volunteers with healthy gingival tissues, after stimulation with
Porphyromonas gingivalis surface components such as fimbriae, lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS) and its lipid A, but not LPS or lipid A from other bacterial species. A
decrease in number of specific binding sites for P. gingivalis fimbrial molecules
in inflamed HGF is also observed by Scatchard plot analysis. A short exposure (6 
h) to P. gingivalis LPS resulted in significant potentiation of the LPS-dependent
IL-8 production in normal HGF, whereas a long exposure (48 h) to the LPS
significantly reduced IL-8 production. Tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins of
127 kDa and 186 kDa in inflamed HGF stimulated with P. gingivalis fimbriae or its
LPS was observed by immunoblotting, and these two phosphoproteins were termed
tolerance-induced protein, TIP. Protein bands of 45 kDa which bound to
radioiodinated P. gingivalis fimbriae in the presence and absence of fetal bovine
serum (FBS), and major 73-kDa and minor 30-kDa and 45-kDa bands which bound to
radioiodinated P. gingivalis LPS in the presence of FBS in normal and inflamed
HGF were observed by using photocrosslinking. These findings suggest that the
hyporesponsiveness of HGF induced by a prolonged exposure to P. gingivalis may
emerge because of HGF damage or result from host defense in chronic periodontal
lesions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.1997.tb01023.x 
PMID: 9215583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

