
1. Immunology. 1997 Jun;91(2):303-13.

Pattern of cytokine receptors expressed by human dendritic cells migrated from
dermal explants.

Larregina AT(1), Morelli AE, Kolkowski E, Sanjuan N, Barboza ME, Fainboim L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Different reasons account for the lack of information about the expression of
cytokine receptors on human dendritic cells (DC): (a) DC are a trace population; 
(b) the proteolytic treatment used to isolate DC may alter enzyme-sensitive
epitopes; and (c) low numbers of receptors per cell. In the present work the
expression of cytokine receptors was analysed by flow cytometry on the population
of dermal DC (DDC) that spontaneously migrate from short-term culture dermal
explants. DDC obtained after dermal culture were CD1alow, CD1b+, CD1c+, human
leucocyte antigen (HLA)-DR+, CD11chigh, CD11b+ and CD32+. The DC lineage was
confirmed by ultrastructural analysis. DDC expressed interleukin (IL)-1R type 1
(monoclonal antibody (mAb) hIL-1R1-M1; and 6B5); IL-1R type 2 (mAb hIL-1R2-M22); 
IL-2R alpha chain (mAb anti-Tac; and hIL-2R-M1) and IL-2R gamma chain (mAb 3B5;
and AG14C). DDC did not stain for IL-2R beta chain using four mAbs recognizing
two different epitopes of IL-2R beta (mAb 2R-B; Mik-beta 1; and CF1; Mik-beta 3, 
respectively). DDC were also positive for the cytokine binding chains (alpha
chains) of IL-3R (mAb 9F5); IL-4R (mAb hIL-4R-M57; and S456C9); and IL-7R (mAb
hIL-7R-M20; and R3434). DDC showed low levels of IL-6R alpha chain (mAb B-F19;
B-R6; and B-E23) and its signal transducer gp130 (mAb A2; and B1). DDC strongly
expressed interferon-gamma receptor (IFN-gamma R) (mAb GIR-208) and were negative
for IL-8R (mAb B-G20; and B-F25). All DDC were highly positive for
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor (GM-CSFR) alpha chain
(mAb hGM-CSFR-M1; SC06; SC04, and 8G6) and to a lesser extent for the common beta
chain of GM-CSFR, IL-3R and IL-5R (mAb 3D7). On the other hand, reactivity was
not found for granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor (G-CSFR) (mAb
hGCSFR-M1) nor macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor (M-CSFR) (mAb
7-7A3-17) confirming the DC lineage of DDC. As previously reported for lymphoid
DC, DDC expressed tumour necrosis factor receptort (TNFR) 75000 MW (mAb utr-1;
hTNFR-M1; and MR2-1) but lacked TNFR 55000 MW (mAb htr-9; MR1-1; and MR1-2). In
summary, DDC express receptors for a broad panel of cytokines, even receptors for
cytokines whose effects on DC are still unknown (i.e. IL-2R alpha gamma; IL-6R
alpha/gp 130; IL-7R alpha gamma).

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.1997.00250.x 
PMCID: PMC1363862
PMID: 9227332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

