
1. J Mol Biol. 1997 Jul 11;270(2):125-38.

Transcriptional activation via DNA-looping: visualization of intermediates in the
activation pathway of E. coli RNA polymerase x sigma 54 holoenzyme by scanning
force microscopy.

Rippe K(1), Guthold M, von Hippel PH, Bustamante C.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum Abteilung Biophysik der Makromolek√ºle,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Scanning force microscopy (SFM) has been used to study transcriptional activation
of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase x sigma 54 (RNAP x sigma 54) at the glnA
promoter by the constitutive mutant NtrC(D54E,S160F) of the NtrC Protein
(nitrogen regulatory protein C). DNA-protein complexes were deposited on mica and
images were recorded in air. The DNA template was a 726 bp linear fragment with
two NtrC binding sites located at the end and about 460 bp away from the RNAP x
sigma 54 glnA promoter. By choosing appropriate conditions the structure of
various intermediates in the transcription process could be visualized and
analyzed: (1) different multimeric complexes of NtrC(D54E,S160F) dimers bound to 
the DNA template; (2) the closed complex of RNAP x sigma 54 at the glnA promoter;
(3) association between DNA bound RNAP x sigma 54 and NtrC(D54E,S160F) with the
intervening DNA looped out; and (4) the activated open promoter complex of RNAP x
sigma 54. Measurements of the DNA bending angle of RNAP x sigma 54 closed
promoter complexes yielded an apparent bending angle of 49(+/-24) degrees. Under 
conditions that allowed the formation of the open promoter complex, the
distribution of bending angles displayed two peaks at 50(+/-24) degrees and
114(+/-18) degrees, suggesting that the transition from the RNAP x sigma 54
closed complex to the open complex is accompanied by an increase of the DNA
bending angle.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1079 
PMID: 9236116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

