
1. J Cell Biol. 1997 Aug 11;138(3):707-17.

CD36 mediates the In vitro inhibitory effects of thrombospondin-1 on endothelial 
cells.

Dawson DW(1), Pearce SF, Zhong R, Silverstein RL, Frazier WA, Bouck NP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology and Robert H. Lurie Cancer Center,
Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) is a naturally occurring inhibitor of angiogenesis that 
is able to make normal endothelial cells unresponsive to a wide variety of
inducers. Here we use both native TSP-1 and small antiangiogenic peptides derived
from it to show that this inhibition is mediated by CD36, a transmembrane
glycoprotein found on microvascular endothelial cells. Both IgG antibodies
against CD36 and glutathione-S-transferase-CD36 fusion proteins that contain the 
TSP-1 binding site blocked the ability of intact TSP-1 and its active peptides to
inhibit the migration of cultured microvascular endothelial cells. In addition,
antiangiogenic TSP-1 peptides inhibited the binding of native TSP-1 to solid
phase CD36 and its fusion proteins, as well as to CD36-expressing cells.
Additional molecules known to bind CD36, including the IgM anti-CD36 antibody SM,
oxidized (but not unoxidized) low density lipoprotein, and human collagen 1,
mimicked TSP-1 by inhibiting the migration of human microvascular endothelial
cells. Transfection of CD36-deficient human umbilical vein endothelial cells with
a CD36 expression plasmid caused them to become sensitive to TSP-1 inhibition of 
their migration and tube formation. This work demonstrates that endothelial CD36,
previously thought to be involved only in adhesion and scavenging activities, may
be essential for the inhibition of angiogenesis by thrombospondin-1.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.138.3.707 
PMCID: PMC2141641
PMID: 9245797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

