
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Aug 19;94(17):9028-33.

SMRT corepressor interacts with PLZF and with the PML-retinoic acid receptor
alpha (RARalpha) and PLZF-RARalpha oncoproteins associated with acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Hong SH(1), David G, Wong CW, Dejean A, Privalsky ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Microbiology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Retinoic acid receptors (RARs) are hormone-regulated transcription factors that
control key aspects of normal differentiation. Aberrant RAR activity may be a
causal factor in neoplasia. Human acute promyelocytic leukemia, for example, is
tightly linked to chromosomal translocations that fuse novel amino acid sequences
(denoted PML, PLZF, and NPM) to the DNA-binding and hormone-binding domains of
RARalpha. The resulting chimeric receptors have unique transcriptional properties
that may contribute to leukemogenesis. Normal RARs repress gene transcription by 
associating with ancillary factors denoted corepressors (also referred to as
SMRT, N-CoR, TRAC, or RIP13). We report here that the PML-RARalpha and
PLZF-RARalpha oncoproteins retain the ability of RARalpha to associate with
corepressors, and that this corepressor association correlates with certain
aspects of the leukemic phenotype. Unexpectedly, the PLZF moiety itself can
interact with SMRT corepressor. This interaction with corepressor is mediated, in
part, by a POZ motif within PLZF. Given the presence of POZ motifs in a number of
known transcriptional repressors, similar interactions with SMRT may play a role 
in transcriptional silencing by a variety of both receptor and nonreceptor
transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.17.9028 
PMCID: PMC23013
PMID: 9256429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

