
1. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Sep 15;66(4):524-31.

Evidence for inhibition of MyEF-2 binding to MBP promoter by MEF-1/Pur alpha.

Muralidharan V(1), Tretiakova A, Steplewski A, Haas S, Amini S, Johnson E,
Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurovirology, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

Myelin basic protein (MBP) is a major component of the myelin sheath whose
production is developmentally controlled during myelinogenesis. Earlier studies
have indicated that programmed expression of the MBP gene is regulated at the
level of transcription. Evidently, the MB1 regulatory motif located between
nucleotides -14 to -50 plays an important role in transcription of the MBP
promoter in both in vivo systems. The MB1 element contains binding sites for the 
activator protein MEF-1/Pur alpha and the repressor protein MyEF-2. In this study
we use bandshift assays with purified MEF-1/Pur alpha and MyEF-2 and demonstrate 
that binding of MyEF-2 to its target sequence is inhibited by MEF-1/Pur alpha.
Under similar conditions, MyEF-2 enhances the association of MEF-1/Pur alpha with
MB1 DNA. MEF-1/Pur alpha binds to MB1 in mono- and dimeric forms. Inclusion of
MyEF-2 in the binding reaction increases the dimeric association of MEF-1/Pur
alpha with the MB1 sequence. The use of MEF-1/Pur alpha variants in the bandshift
assay suggests that two distinct regions of this protein may be involved in its
binding to the MB1 sequences, and its ability to block MyEF-2 interaction with
the MB1 sequence. Based on previous studies on the programmed expression of
MEF-1/Pur alpha and MyEF-2 during myelination and the current findings on their
interplay for binding to the MB1 motif, a model is proposed for their involvement
in transcriptional regulation of the MBP gene during the course of brain
development.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-4644(19970915)66:4<524::aid-jcb11>3.0.co;2-b 
PMID: 9282330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

