
1. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 1997 Aug;33(2):109-16.

Bacillus stearothermophilus as a model to evaluate membrane toxicity of a
lipophilic environmental pollutant (DDT).

Donato MM(1), Jurado AS, Antunes-Madeira MC, Madeira VM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de NeurociÃªncias, Departamento de Zoologia, Universidade de Coimbra,
3000 Coimbra, Portugal.

The thermophilic eubacterium Bacillus stearothermophilus has been used as a model
system to identify DDT-promoted events in biological membranes putatively related
with the insecticide toxicity. Two strategies have been approached: a) bacterial 
growth and viability were followed and the effects of DDT
(2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-1,1,1-trichloroethane) determined; b) biophysical
studies with fluorescent probes were performed to elucidate the effects of DDT on
the organization of the membrane lipid bilayer. The effects of DDT on growth and 
physical properties of the membrane were also determined in the presence of Ca2+ 
to further identify the interference of the insecticide at the membrane level and
its putative contribution to cell toxicity. Growth inhibition by DDT is
concentration-dependent, being attenuated or removed by the addition of 2.5-mM
Ca2+ to bacterial cultures. Consistently, fluorescence polarization of
1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH) and its propionic acid derivative (DPH-PA)
exhibited opposite effects of Ca2+ and DDT on the physical state of bacterial
polar lipid dispersions. Growth and viability of bacterial cells are affected by 
DDT concentrations lower than those able to induce detectable bulk fluidity
alterations, indicating high sensitivity of the intact bacterial system to
alterations in limited membrane domains not directly probed by fluorescent probes
that only report the average behavior of membrane lipid population.

DOI: 10.1007/s002449900231 
PMID: 9294237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

