
1. J Immunol. 1997 Sep 15;159(6):2840-8.

CD28 expression by mouse mast cells is modulated by lipopolysaccharide and outer 
surface protein A lipoprotein from Borrelia burgdorferi.

Marietta EV(1), Weis JJ, Weis JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City
84132, USA.

The concept of costimulation has been best defined in T cells and B cells.
However, other cells that respond in an Ag-specific fashion, such as the mast
cell, may be regulated by similar mechanisms. We have found that murine mast
cells express one such costimulatory molecule, CD28, which was previously defined
as a T and NK cell-specific protein. While CD28 transcription appeared to be
constitutive in murine mast cells, its cell surface expression was not. CD28 cell
surface expression by mast cells derived from bone marrow with stem cell factor
(SCF) was dependent upon activation with agents such as LPS, the Borrelia
burgdorferi lipoprotein outer surface protein A, and PMA. Peak cell surface
expression of CD28 by such cells occurred 24 h after LPS stimulation, 18 h after 
outer surface protein A stimulation, and 3 h after PMA stimulation. In contrast, 
mast cells derived from bone marrow with IL-3 did not demonstrate
induction-specific cell surface expression of CD28. Instead, maturation of such
cells in vitro allowed for the increased cell surface expression of CD28.
Peritoneal mast cells cultured in SCF also expressed CD28. Mast cell CD28 was
functional, in that cross-linking of CD28 on the surface of the IL-3-derived
cells resulted in an increased level of c-jun transcripts. Additionally,
cross-linking of CD28 simultaneously with PMA treatment of SCF-derived mast cells
resulted in an increased level of IL-13 transcripts. These data suggest that mast
cell CD28 has functions similar to those of T cell CD28.


PMID: 9300707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

