
1. J Immunol. 1997 Sep 15;159(6):2986-93.

Increased expression of signaling lymphocytic activation molecule in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis and its role in the regulation of cytokine production
in rheumatoid synovium.

Isom√§ki P(1), Aversa G, Cocks BG, Luukkainen R, Saario R, Toivanen P, de Vries
JE, Punnonen J.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Immunology Centre/Department of Medical Microbiology, Turku University, 
Finland. pia.isomaki@utu.fi

In the present study the expression and function of signaling lymphocytic
activation molecule (SLAM) in lymphocytes from patients with rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) were investigated. The expression levels of SLAM were significantly
up-regulated on synovial fluid and synovial tissue T cells from patients with RA 
compared with peripheral blood T cells from the same patients or from healthy
volunteers. In addition, the expression of SLAM on peripheral blood B cells from 
patients with RA was elevated compared with that in healthy volunteers. SLAM+ T
cells in synovial fluid coexpressed CD45RO and demonstrated decreased expression 
of CD27, indicative of a primed phenotype. In addition, the activation state of
SLAM+ T cells was enhanced, as judged by increased expression of CD25, CD28,
CD69, and CD95 on these cells. Interestingly, SLAM expression on activated CD4+
and CD8+ T cells from both patients and healthy individuals could be
down-regulated by IL-10, which has been previously shown to function as an
anti-inflammatory molecule in rheumatoid synovium. Furthermore, anti-SLAM mAbs
increased the production of IL-10, IFN-gamma, and TNF-alpha by in vitro activated
synovial fluid mononuclear cells, supporting the idea that signaling through SLAM
may play a role in the regulation of synovial inflammation in patients with RA.
Given the fact that SLAM was recently shown to be a high affinity self ligand,
our data suggest that synovial T cells may stimulate their own cytokine
production through homophilic SLAM-SLAM interactions.


PMID: 9300723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

