
1. Plant Physiol. 1997 Sep;115(1):181-90.

The Arabidopsis TCH4 xyloglucan endotransglycosylase. Substrate specificity, pH
optimum, and cold tolerance.

Purugganan MM(1), Braam J, Fry SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas
77005-1892, USA.

Xyloglucan endotransglycosylases (XETs) modify a major component of the plant
cell wall and therefore may play critical roles in generating tissue properties
and influencing morphogenesis. An XET-related gene family exists in Arabidopsis
thaliana, the members of which show differential regulation of expression. TCH4
expression is rapidly regulated by mechanical stimuli, temperature shifts, light,
and hormones. As a first step in determining whether Arabidopsis XET-related
proteins have distinct properties, we produced recombinant TCH4 protein in
bacteria and determined its enzymatic characteristics. TCH4 specifically
transglycosylates only xyloglucan. The enzyme prefers to transfer a portion of a 
donor polymer onto another xyloglucan polymer (acceptor); TCH4 will also utilize 
xyloglucan-derived oligosaccharides as acceptors but discriminates between
differentially fucosylated oligosaccharides. TCH4 is most active at pH 6.0 to 6.5
and is surprisingly cold-tolerant with an optimum of 12 to 18 degrees C. TCH4
activity is enhanced by urea and bovine serum albumin, but nor cations, reducing 
agents, or carboxymethylcellulose. These studies indicate that TCH4 is specific
for xyloglucan, but that the molecular mass and the fucosyl content of the
substrates influence enzymatic reaction rates. TCH4 is unlikely to play a role in
acid-induced wall loosening but may function in cold acclimation or cold-tolerant
growth.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.115.1.181 
PMCID: PMC158473
PMID: 9306698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

