
1. Biochem J. 1997 Sep 15;326 ( Pt 3):763-72.

Functional and biophysical characterization of recombinant human hepatocyte
growth factor isoforms produced in Escherichia coli.

Stahl SJ(1), Wingfield PT, Kaufman JD, Pannell LK, Cioce V, Sakata H, Taylor WG, 
Rubin JS, Bottaro DP.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Expression Laboratory, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Bldg 6B, Rm. 1B130, 6 Center Dr., MSC 2775,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2775, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is a pluripotent secreted protein that stimulates 
a wide array of cellular targets, including hepatocytes and other epithelial
cells, melanocytes, endothelial and haematopoietic cells. Multiple mRNA species
transcribed from a single HGF gene encode at least three distinct proteins: the
full-length HGF protein and two truncated HGF isoforms that encompass the
N-terminal (N) domain through kringle 1 (NK1) or through kringle 2 (NK2). We
report the high-level expression in Escherichia coli of NK1 and NK2, as well as
the individual kringle 1 (K1) and N domains of HGF. All proteins accumulated as
insoluble aggregates that were solubilized, folded and purified in high yield
using a simple procedure that included two gel-filtration steps. Characterization
of the purified proteins indicated chemical and physical homogeneity, and
analysis by CD suggested native conformations. Although the K1 and N-terminal
domains of HGF have limited biological activity, spectroscopic evidence indicated
that the conformation of each matched that observed when the domains were
components of biologically active NK1. Both NK1 and NK2 produced in bacteria were
functionally equivalent to proteins generated by eukaryotic systems, as indicated
by mitogenicity, cell scatter, and receptor binding and activation assays. These 
data indicate that all four bacterially produced HGF derivatives are well suited 
for detailed structural analysis.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3260763 
PMCID: PMC1218731
PMID: 9307026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

