
1. Cancer Res. 1997 Oct 1;57(19):4348-55.

Synthetic peptides derived from the melanocyte-stimulating hormone receptor MC1R 
can stimulate HLA-A2-restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes that recognize naturally 
processed peptides on human melanoma cells.

Salazar-Onfray F(1), Nakazawa T, Chhajlani V, Petersson M, KÃ¤rre K, Masucci G,
Celis E, Sette A, Southwood S, Appella E, Kiessling R.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Human melanoma-specific HLA-A2 restricted CTLs have recently been shown to
recognize antigens expressed by melanoma lines and normal melanocytes, including 
Melan-A/Mart-1, gp100, gp75, and tyrosinase. Herein, we define HLA-A2-restricted 
CTL epitopes from a recently cloned melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R), which belongs
to a new subfamily of the G-protein-coupled receptors expressed on melanomas and 
melanocytes. Thirty-one MC1R-derived peptides were selected on the basis of
HLA-A2-specific motifs and tested for their HLA-A2 binding capacity. Of a group
of 12 high or intermediate HLA-A2 binding peptides, three nonamers, MC1R244
(TILLGIFFL), MC1R283 (FLALIICNA), and MC1R291 (AIIDPLIYA), were found to induce
peptide-specific CTLs from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of healthy HLA-A2+ 
donors after repeated in vitro stimulation with peptide-pulsed antigen-presenting
cells. The CTLs raised against these three HLA-A2+-restricted peptides could
recognize naturally processed peptides from HLA-A2+ melanomas and from Cos7 cells
cotransfected with MC1R and HLA-A2. CTLs induced by the MC1R291 peptide (but not 
induced or induced only to a very low extent by the other two MCR1 peptide
epitopes) showed cross-reactions with two other members of the melanocortin
receptor family, which are more broadly expressed on other tissues. Taken
together, our findings have implications in relation both to autoimmunity and
immunotherapy of malignant melanomas.


PMID: 9331097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

