
1. Infect Immun. 1997 Nov;65(11):4652-60.

Hyperproduction of alpha-toxin by Staphylococcus aureus results in paradoxically 
reduced virulence in experimental endocarditis: a host defense role for platelet 
microbicidal proteins.

Bayer AS(1), Ramos MD, Menzies BE, Yeaman MR, Shen AJ, Cheung AL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, St. John's Cardiovascular Research Center,
Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California 90509, USA. BAYER@AFP76.HUMC.EDU

Staphylococcal alpha-toxin targets several cell types which are important
components of cardiac vegetations in endocarditis, including platelets,
erythrocytes, and endothelial cells. We evaluated the in vivo role of
Staphylococcus aureus alpha-toxin in experimental endocarditis by using isogenic 
strains differing in the capacity to produce functional alpha-toxin, including
8325-4 (wild-type strain), DU-1090 (a mutant strain with allelic replacement of
the alpha-toxin gene [hla]), DU1090(pH35L) (a mutant strain producing a target
cell-binding but nonlytic toxin), DU1090(pDU1212) (a variant of DU1090 carrying
the cloned hla gene on a multicopy plasmid), and DU1090(pCL84::hla) (a variant of
DU1090 with a single copy of the hla gene cloned into the chromosomal lipase
locus). In vitro, wild-type alpha-toxin (from parental strain 8325-4) extensively
lysed both erythrocytes and platelets. In contrast, mutant alpha-toxin [from
strain DU1090(pH35L)] lysed neither cell type. Following exposure to the
wild-type alpha-toxin, platelet lysates were found to contain microbicidal
activity against Bacillus subtilis (but not against Micrococcus luteus), as well 
as against the parental and alpha-toxin variant S. aureus strains noted above.
Furthermore, lysate microbicidal activity was heat stable, neutralized by
polyanionic filters or compounds, and recoverable from anionic filter membranes
by hypertonic saline elution. These characteristics are consistent with those of 
cationic platelet microbicidal proteins (PMPs). Reverse-phase high-pressure
liquid chromatography and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis confirmed the
presence of three distinct PMPs (1, 2, and 3) in platelet lysates. In
experimental endocarditis, the two variant staphylococcal strains producing
either minimal alpha-toxin or nonlytic alpha-toxin in vitro [strains DU1090 and
DU1090(pH35L), respectively] exhibited significantly lower virulence in vivo than
the parental strain (decreased intravegetation staphylococcal densities).
Paradoxically, the two variant staphylococcal strains producing alpha-toxin at
supraparental levels in vitro [strains DU1090(p1212) and DU1090(pCL84::hla)] also
exhibited significantly decreased induction rates and intravegetation
staphylococcal densities in experimental endocarditis versus the parental strain.
The reduced in vivo virulence of the latter variant staphylococcal strains could 
not be explained by differences in bacteremic clearance or initial adherence to
sterile vegetations (compared to the parental strain). These findings suggest
that the reduced virulence exhibited by the variant staphylococcal strains in
this model was related to pathogenetic events subsequent to bacterial adherence
to the damaged endocardium. Excess intravegetation secretion of alpha-toxin,
leading to increased PMP release (secondary to either increased platelet
secretion or lysis), may well explain the reduced virulence observed in
experimental endocarditis.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.65.11.4652-4660.1997 
PMCID: PMC175667
PMID: 9353046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

