
1. J Dent Res. 1997 Nov;76(11):1770-5.

Isolation of Enterobacteriaceae from the mouth and potential association with
malodor.

Goldberg S(1), Cardash H, Browning H 3rd, Sahly H, Rosenberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Maurice and Gabriela Goldschleger School of Dental Medicine, Ramat-Aviv, Tel
Aviv, Israel.

Bad breath is a common phenomenon, usually the result of bacterial metabolism in 
the oral cavity. It is generally accepted that Gram-negative bacteria are
responsible for this problem, largely through degradation of proteinaceous
substances. In initial experiments, screening of malodorous isolates following
outgrowth of samples obtained from saliva, periodontal pockets, and the tongue
dorsum yielded enterobacterial isolates. Clinical studies were conducted to
examine the prevalence of such bacteria in four different populations:
orthodontic patients, malodor clinic patients, complete-denture wearers, and a
healthy young population. The prevalence of Enterobacteriaceae in the oral
cavities of the denture-wearing population was very high (48.0%) as compared with
the other groups: 27.1% in the malodor clinic patients, 16.4% in the normal
population, and 13% among orthodontic patients. Isolates of Klebsiella and
Enterobacter emitted foul odors in vitro which resembled bad breath, with
concomitant production of volatile sulfides and cadaverine, both compounds
related to bad breath. When incubated on a sterile denture, enterobacterial
isolates produced typical denture foul odor. Isolates exhibited cell-surface
hydrophobic properties when tested for adhesion to acryl and aggregation with
ammonium sulphate. The results, taken together, suggest that Klebsiella and
related Enterobacteriaceae may play a role in denture malodor.

DOI: 10.1177/00220345970760110801 
PMID: 9372794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

