
1. Electrophoresis. 1997 Aug;18(9):1577-85.

On simple repetitive DNA sequences and complex diseases.

Epplen C(1), Santos EJ, MÃ¤ueler W, van Helden P, Epplen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany. joerg.t.epplen@.ruhr-uni-bochum.de

Simple repetitive DNA sequences are abundantly interspersed in eukaryote genomes 
and therefore useful in genome research and genetic fingerprinting in plants,
fungi and animals, including man. Recently, simple repeats were also identified
in some prokaryotic genomes. Hence the same probes can be applied for multilocus 
DNA fingerprinting in medically relevant bacteria. Simple repeats including
composite dinucleotide microsatellites are differentially represented in
different compartments of eukaryote genomes. Expanded triplet blocks in and
around certain genes may, for example, cause so-called trinucleotide diseases in 
man. As a consequence, simple repetitive sequences should also be characterized
with respect to their influences on the DNA structure, gene expression, genomic
(in)stability and their development on an evolutionary time scale. Here three
examples of microsatellites in the human major histocompatibility complex (HLA)
are investigated, a (GT)n microsatellite situated 2 kb 5' off the lymphotoxin
alpha (LTA) gene, a (GAA)n block in the 5' part of the HLA-F gene and a composite
(GT)n(GA)m stretch in the second intron of HLA-DRBl genes. Grossly differing
mutation rates are evident in these elements as well as varying linkage
disequilibria. The unfolding of these simple repeats in distant human populations
is covered including Caucasians, Bushmen and South American Indians. Furthermore,
implications of simple repeat neighboring genes are discussed for the
multifactorial diseases multiple sclerosis (MS), rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and
early onset pauciarticular arthritis (EOPA). Polymorphisms of HLA-DRBl and T cell
receptor beta variable (TCRBV) genes confer susceptibility for these autoimmune
diseases as demonstrable by intronic simple repeat variability. Microsatellite
polymorphisms within the TNF region reveal linkage disequilibria with HLA-DRBl
and different promotor alleles of the TNFA gene. Disease associations with TNFA
microsatellite alleles are, on the one hand, secondary to associations with
HLA-DRBl genes (in MS) or they represent additional risk factors (in RA, EOPA) on
the other hand. Evolutionary persistence, various structural conformations and
the specific binding of nuclear proteins to several simple repeat sequences
refute the preconceptions of biological insignificance for all of these
ubiquitously interspersed elements.

DOI: 10.1002/elps.1150180916 
PMID: 9378125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

