
1. J Immunol. 1997 Oct 15;159(8):3899-909.

Formation of a regulatory factor X/X2 box-binding protein/nuclear factor-Y
multiprotein complex on the conserved regulatory regions of HLA class II genes.

Louis-Plence P(1), Moreno CS, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Coordinate regulation of MHC class II genes occurs in a tissue-specific and
cytokine-inducible manner. While the upstream regulatory sequences are conserved 
among all MHC class II genes, multiple base pair changes are found, even within
the essential X box region. Analysis of all class II X boxes reveals differential
binding between two transcription factors known to interact with the X box
region, regulatory factor X and X2 box-binding protein (RFX and X2BP) of the
HLA-DRA gene. These data presented a paradox with regard to the coordinate
regulation of the class II genes if the factors though to regulate the HLA-DRA
gene do not bind to the homologous sequence of all class II genes. Previous
results suggested that cooperative interactions between the DNA binding proteins 
may be the key to understanding this paradox. Here RFX/X2BP/DNA complexes were
formed on all class II isotypes regardless of the ability of the X box region to 
bind either factor individually. To further determine the role of the
interactions between the X and Y factors, multiprotein/DNA complexes containing
RFX, X2BP, NF-Y, and X-Y box DNA of the DRA and DRB genes were formed. This
quaternary complex was extremely stable to competitor DNA, with a half-life > 4
h. These results suggest that the conserved X and Y boxes of class II genes
function similarly and define a single multiprotein regulatory complex for class 
II expression in B cells.


PMID: 9378978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

