
1. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 1997 Nov;33(4):341-9.

Effects of a lipophilic environmental pollutant (DDT) on the phospholipid and
fatty acid contents of Bacillus stearothermophilus.

Donato MM(1), Jurado AS, Antunes-Madeira MC, Madeira VM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de NeurociÃªncias, Universidade de Coimbra, 3000 Coimbra, Portugal.

Cultures of Bacillus stearothermophilus grown in a complex medium containing 1
microM DDT, exhibited longer lag adapting periods, decreased specific growth
rates, and lower growth yield as compared to control cultures. The membrane lipid
composition from cells grown in the presence of the insecticide was significantly
different from that of control cells. The effects of DDT
(2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-1, 1,1-trichloroethane) on growth and lipid composition 
of bacterial cells were also determined in cultures grown in a medium
supplemented with Ca2+ (membrane stabilizer) to further clarify the influence of 
growth conditions on bacterial responses to the toxicant. The main membrane-lipid
changes induced by DDT relate to a very significant increase (74%) of the
relative concentration of a phosphoglycolipid, an increase of the
phosphatidylethanolamine content, with a parallel decrease of
phosphatidylglycerol and an unidentified phospholipid X0. The changes of the
phospholipid acyl chains relate to an increase of straight chains and a parallel 
decrease of branched chains. The effects of DDT-induced lipid composition
alterations on membrane physical properties were monitored by fluorescence
polarization studies with bacterial polar lipid dispersions. Changes in the
membrane lipids upon growing the bacteria in a DDT-containing medium promoted, as
expected, more ordered membranes with a shift of the phase transition temperature
to higher values. Data are interpreted in the frame of an adaptation mechanism to
counteract the membrane perturbation resulting from the accumulation of the
insecticide molecules in the lipid bilayer.

DOI: 10.1007/s002449900263 
PMID: 9419252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

