
1. Exp Hematol. 1998 Jan;26(1):10-8.

Cell adhesion molecule expression on CD34+ cells in grafts and time to myeloid
and platelet recovery after autologous stem cell transplantation.

Watanabe T(1), Dave B, Heimann DG, Jackson JD, Kessinger A, Talmadge JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology/Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha 68198-5660, USA.

The relationship between cell adhesion receptor expression on CD34+ cells in stem
cell grafts and the time to neutrophil and platelet recovery after autologous
stem cell transplantation (ASCT [n = 25]) was studied with
granulocyte/monocyte-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-mobilized peripheral
blood stem cells (PBSCs) and steady-state bone marrow (BM) harvests. Cell
adhesion receptor expression was analyzed using flow cytometry after CD34+ cell
enrichment. Significantly higher expression of L-selectin and CD44, and
significantly lower expression of VLA-4, LFA-1, ICAM-1, Sialyl Lewis(x), Sialyl
Lewis(A), and Thy-1 were observed on PBSCs compared with BM CD34+ cells. The log 
of the number of reinfused CD34+ cells, colony forming units
granulocyte/macrophage (CFU-GM), and CD34+ cells coexpressing VLA-4, VLA-5,
LAF-1, Mac-1, LFA-3, or CD38 but not ICAM-1, Sialyl Lewis(x), Sialyl Lewis(A), or
Thy-1 correlated with the time required to reach an absolute neutrophil count
(ANC) of > or =0.5 x 10(9)/L. In addition, the log of the number of CD34+
L-selectin+ and CD34+CD44+ cells reinfused after ASCT correlated better with the 
time required to reach an ANC of > or =0.5 x 10(9)/L than did the log of the
number of CD34+ cells or CFU-GM reinfused. The log of the number of reinfused
CD34+ cells, CFU-GM, and CD34+ cells coexpressing CD44, L-selectin, VLA-5 Mac-1, 
or CD38, but not VLA-4, LAF-1, ICAM-1, LAF-3, Sialyl Lewis(X), Sialyl Lewis(A),
or Thy-1, correlated with the time required to reach a platelet count of >20 x
10(9)/L. Thus, L-selectin or CD44 may play an important role in the homing of
progenitors after ASCT. In addition, the higher proportion of CD34+L-selectin+ or
CD34+CD44+ cells in leukapheresis products may provide one explanation for the
more rapid hematologic reconstitution observed after PBSC transplantation.


PMID: 9430509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

