
1. J Exp Med. 1998 Jan 19;187(2):225-36.

A natural immunological adjuvant enhances T cell clonal expansion through a
CD28-dependent, interleukin (IL)-2-independent mechanism.

Khoruts A(1), Mondino A, Pape KA, Reiner SL, Jenkins MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.
khoru001@maroon.tc.umn .edu

The adoptive transfer of naive CD4(+) T cell receptor (TCR) transgenic T cells
was used to investigate the mechanisms by which the adjuvant lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) enhance T cell clonal expansion in vivo. Subcutaneous administration of
soluble antigen (Ag) resulted in rapid and transient accumulation of the
Ag-specific T cells in the draining lymph nodes (LNs), which was preceded by the 
production of interleukin (IL)-2. CD28-deficient, Ag-specific T cells produced
only small amounts of IL-2 in response to soluble Ag and did not accumulate in
the LN to the same extent as wild-type T cells. Injection of Ag and LPS, a
natural immunological adjuvant, enhanced IL-2 production and LN accumulation of
wild-type, Ag-specific T cells but had no significant effect on CD28-deficient,
Ag-specific T cells. Therefore, CD28 is critical for Ag-driven IL-2 production
and T cell proliferation in vivo, and is essential for the LPS-mediated
enhancement of these events. However, enhancement of IL-2 production could not
explain the LPS-dependent increase of T cell accumulation because IL-2-deficient,
Ag-specific T cells accumulated to a greater extent in the LN than wild-type T
cells in response to Ag plus LPS. These results indicate that adjuvants improve T
cell proliferation in vivo via a CD28-dependent signal that can operate in the
absence of IL-2.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.187.2.225 
PMCID: PMC2212094
PMID: 9432980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

