
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1998 Jan;157(1):10-4.

Elemental content of airway surface liquid from infants with cystic fibrosis.

Hull J(1), Skinner W, Robertson C, Phelan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville,
Melbourne, Australia.

We tested the hypothesis that airway surface liquid (ASL) electrolyte composition
is altered in infants with cystic fibrosis (CF) and that the presence of airway
inflammation affects ASL composition. We measured the tracheal ASL sodium and
chloride concentration and examined bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid cytology, 
interleukin-8 (IL-8) concentrations, and quantitative bacterial culture in 19
infants and young children with CF. Seven infants undergoing bronchoscopy for the
evaluation of stridor served as non-CF controls. In addition, we measured nasal
ASL sodium and chloride concentrations from 10 young adults with CF and from 10
control subjects. On the basis of the BAL findings, the infants with CF were
divided into three groups: one with little evidence of pulmonary inflammation
(CF-NI, n = 5); one with obvious pulmonary inflammation (CF-I, n = 7); and an
intermediate group (CF-MI, n = 7). We found the ASL sodium was not different
among any of the four groups (means mM +/- SE, 85 +/- 10 controls; 78 +/- 16
CF-NI; 83 +/- 9 CF-MI, 84 +/- 9 CF-I). In contrast the ASL chloride was lower in 
the CF-NI group when compared with control subjects (108 +/- 5 control subjects; 
77 +/- 7 CF-NI, p < 0.01). In the CF-I and CF-MI groups, the ASL chloride
concentrations were of intermediate values (CF-I 95 +/- 10 mM; CF-MI 96 +/- 9 mM)
and not significantly different from controls. Results from the nasal ASL
analysis showed no significant differences in sodium and chloride concentrations 
in the CF group compared with control subjects. These results suggest that the
primary abnormality of ASL composition is a reduction in chloride concentration. 
ASL composition appears to be affected by the presence of airway inflammation.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.157.1.9703045 
PMID: 9445271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

