
1. Infect Immun. 1998 Feb;66(2):703-9.

Treponema denticola outer membrane inhibits calcium flux in gingival fibroblasts.

Ko KS(1), Glogauer M, McCulloch CA, Ellen RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Treponema denticola is a cultivable oral spirochete which perturbs the
cytoskeleton in cultured cells of oral origin, but intracellular signalling
pathways by which it affects actin assembly are largely unknown. As the outer
membrane (OM) of Treponema denticola disrupts actin-dependent processes that
normally require precise control of intracellular calcium, we studied the effects
of an OM extract on internal calcium release, ligand-gated and calcium
release-activated calcium channels, and related mechanosensitive cation fluxes in
human gingival fibroblasts (HGF). Single-cell ratio fluorimetry demonstrated that
in resting cells loaded with Fura-2, baseline intracellular Ca2+ concentration
([Ca2+]i) was not affected by treatment with OM extract, but normal spontaneous
[Ca2+]i oscillations were dramatically increased in frequency for 20 to 30 min
followed by complete blockade. OM extract inhibited ATP-induced and
thapsigargin-induced release of calcium from intracellular stores by 40 and 30%, 
respectively. Addition of Ca2+ to the extracellular pool following depletion of
intracellular Ca2+ by thapsigargin and extracellular Ca2+ by EGTA yielded 59%
less replenishment of [Ca2+]i in OM extract-treated than in control HGF. In cells
loaded with collagen-coated ferric oxide beads to stimulate integrin-dependent
calcium release, baseline [Ca2+]i was nearly doubled but was not significantly
different in control and OM extract-treated cells. Magnetically generated tensile
forces on the beads induced >300% increases of [Ca2+]i above baseline. Cells
preincubated with OM extract exhibited dose-dependent and time-dependent
reductions in stretch-induced [Ca2+]i transients, which were due to neither loss 
of beads from the cells nor cell death. The T. denticola OM inhibitory activity
was eliminated by heating the OM extract to 60 degrees C and by boiling but not
by phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride treatment. Thus nonlipopolysaccharide,
nonchymotrypsin, heat-sensitive protein(s) in T. denticola OM can evidently
inhibit both release of calcium from internal stores and uptake of calcium
through the plasma membrane, possibly by interference with calcium
release-activated channels.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.66.2.703-709.1998 
PMCID: PMC107960
PMID: 9453630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

