
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1998 Jan;111(1):56-63.

Potential role of B7-1 and CD28 molecules in immunosuppression in leprosy.

Agrewala JN(1), Kumar B, Vohra H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh, India.

In order to understand the mechanism of unresponsiveness towards Mycobacterium
leprae antigens in leprosy, we evaluated the role of M. leprae sonicate antigens 
in regulating the expression of the costimulatory molecules B7-1, CD28,
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), LFA-1alpha, LFA-1beta and Mac-1 on
the lymphocytes of both leprosy patients and healthy subjects. It was observed
that the expression of B7-1 and CD28 was significantly decreased but the levels
of ICAM-1 and LFA-1alpha were increased in patients with untreated borderline
leprosy (BL)/lepromatous leprosy (LL) disease. No remarkable change was noticed
in the case of borderline tuberculoid (BT) leprosy or treated BL/LL patients.
Further, a striking finding was that lymphocytes from healthy subjects cultured
with a particularly high dose of M. leprae sonicate antigens down-regulated the
expression of B7-1 and CD28 molecules, but up-regulated the display of ICAM-1 and
LFA-1alpha. Furthermore, proliferation induced by M. leprae sonicate was
inhibited only by anti-B7-1 antibody. Mycobacterium leprae antigen-induced
suppression of the proliferation of lymphocytes of healthy volunteers and LL
patients was reversed by culturing the lymphocytes with purified protein
derivative (PPD). It may be concluded from the findings in this study that down
regulation of B7-1 and CD28 in BL/LL leprosy patients may be responsible for a
defective T cell signalling by the B7-1/CD28 pathway caused by M. leprae
antigens. This may lead to clonal inactivation of M. leprae-reactive T cells,
consequently the bacilli grow without restriction in macrophages.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.1998.00463.x 
PMCID: PMC1904849
PMID: 9472661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

