
1. Infect Immun. 1998 Mar;66(3):1225-32.

Mouse beta-defensin 1 is a salt-sensitive antimicrobial peptide present in
epithelia of the lung and urogenital tract.

Bals R(1), Goldman MJ, Wilson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Engineering, The Institute for Human Gene
Therapy, The University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia 19104-4268, 
USA.

One component of host defense at mucosal surfaces appears to be
epithelium-derived peptides with antimicrobial activity called defensins. Human
beta-defensin 1 (hBD-1) represents the first member of the beta-defensin family
isolated from humans and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of cystic
fibrosis. We describe in this report the isolation and characterization of a
murine homolog of hBD-1 called mouse beta-defensin 1 (mBD-1). The predicted amino
acid sequence shows the hallmark features of other known epithelial
beta-defensins, including the ordered array of six cysteine residues. Analysis of
a genomic clone of mBD-1 revealed two exons separated by a 15-kb intron. By use
of fluorescence in situ hybridization, the mBD-1 gene was localized at the
proximal portion of chromosome 8, the site where mouse alpha-defensins are found.
Lysates from cells transfected with the mBD-1 cDNA showed antibacterial activity 
against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. mBD-1 transcripts were found in
kidney, liver, and female reproductive organ tissues. In the airways, mBD-1 is
expressed diffusely throughout the epithelial cells of the large proximal airways
with less expression in the small distal airways and no expression in alveolar
cells. The present study demonstrates that a beta-defensin potentially homologous
to human beta-defensin 1 is present in the respiratory system and other mucosal
surfaces in mice.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.66.3.1225-1232.1998 
PMCID: PMC108037
PMID: 9488417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

