
1. Mamm Genome. 1998 Mar;9(3):186-92.

BAC clones and STS markers near the distal breakpoint of the fourth t-inversion, 
In(17)4d, in the H2-M region on mouse chromosome 17.

Yoshino M(1), Xiao H, Amadou C, Jones EP, Lindahl KF.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology and Biochemistry, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas 75235-9050, USA.

The H2-M region is the most distal part of the mouse major histocompatibility
complex (Mhc) and is likely to include the distal breakpoint of the fourth
t-inversion, In(17)4d. The conserved synteny breakpoint between mouse and human
is located in the H2-M region between D17Leh89, a putative olfactory receptor
gene, and Pgk2 (phosphoglycerate kinase 2). To analyze the H2-M region, we
screened a mouse bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) library, using the
D17Mit64, D17Tu49, D17Leh89, D17Leh467, and Pgk2 markers. Thirty-eight BAC clones
were obtained and mapped in five clusters, and 25 sequence-tagged site (STS)
markers were newly developed. The regions surrounding D17Tu49 and D17Leh467 are
abundant in L1 repeat sequences and may, therefore, be candidates for the
breakpoints of conserved synteny and t-inversion. D17Leh89 was linked to D17Mit64
by two contiguous BAC clones. The Aeg1 (acidic epididymal glycoprotein 1) and
Aeg2 genes were mapped close to Pgk2, on the same BAC clones. The genetic length 
between D17Leh89-D17Mit64 and Pgk2-Aeg can be estimated as 0.5-0.7 centiMorgan
(cM), and the most distal class I gene, H2-M2, can be placed 0.3-1.0 cM proximal 
to the t-inversion breakpoint. A recombinational hotspot is suggested to be
located between Aeg and Tpxl in an interspecific cross of (C57BL/6J x Mus
spretus).

DOI: 10.1007/s003359900723 
PMID: 9501300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

