
1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 1998 Mar;24(1):14-30.

Myeloid progenitor cell proliferation and mobilization effects of BB10010, a
genetically engineered variant of human macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha,
in a phase I clinical trial in patients with relapsed/refractory breast cancer.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Orazi A, Hague NL, Sledge GW Jr, Rasmussen H, Gordon MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology and Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
hal_broxmeyer@iucc.iupui.edu

Macrophage Inflammatory Protein (MIP)-1alpha is myelosuppressive in vitro and in 
vivo for hematopoietic stem and immature subsets of myeloid progenitor cells,
demonstrates some myeloprotective effects in mice treated with Ara-C and
hydroxyurea, and has stem/progenitor cell mobilizing activity in mice. Based on
these observations, BB10010, a genetic variant of MIP-1alpha, was assessed for
effects on marrow and blood myeloid progenitor cells in patients with
relapsed/refractory breast cancer. MIP-1alpha readily polymerizes, whereas
BB10010 has a reduced tendency to form large polymers at physiological pH and
ionic strength and retains biological activity. Patients were injected with 5,
10, 30 or 100 microg/kg BB10010 s.c. daily for 3 days. BB10010 significantly
reduced the cycling status of marrow myeloid progenitors from pretreatment levels
of 39-58% to 0 - 11% one day after the third and last injection of BB10010. This 
was associated with significant decreases in frequency of marrow progenitors
(number of colonies formed per number of cells plated) and percent biopsied
marrow CD34+ cells. The suppressive effects were reversible in patients and the
rapidity of this reversal demonstrated in mouse studies. BB10010 had no effect on
nucleated cellularity or on the proliferation of nucleated cells as assessed in
marrow biopsies from the patients. These latter effects may in part reflect the
noted decreased apoptosis of nucleated cells by BB10010. BB10010 also
demonstrated significant but modest myeloid progenitor cell mobilizing capacity. 
Blood progenitors were in a slow or non-cycling state prior to treatment and this
did not change after administration of BB10010. The above effects of BB10010 were
similar at the four different dosage levels assessed. These results demonstrate
in humans the suppressive and mobilizing effects of MIP-1alpha and BB10010
previously noted in vivo in mice.

Copyright 1998 The Blood Cells Foundation.

DOI: 10.1006/bcmd.1998.0167 
PMID: 9516378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

