
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 31;95(7):3413-8.

Crystal structure of MTCP-1: implications for role of TCL-1 and MTCP-1 in T cell 
malignancies.

Fu ZQ(1), Du Bois GC, Song SP, Kulikovskaya I, Virgilio L, Rothstein JL, Croce
CM, Weber IT, Harrison RW.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas
Jefferson University, 233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Two related oncogenes, TCL-1 and MTCP-1, are overexpressed in T cell
prolymphocytic leukemias as a result of chromosomal rearrangements that involve
the translocation of one T cell receptor gene to either chromosome 14q32 or Xq28.
The crystal structure of human recombinant MTCP-1 protein has been determined at 
2.0 A resolution by using multiwavelength anomalous dispersion data from
selenomethionine-enriched protein and refined to an R factor of 0.21. MTCP-1
folds into a compact eight-stranded beta barrel structure with a short helix
between the fourth and fifth strands. The topology is unique. The structure of
TCL-1 has been predicted by molecular modeling based on 40% amino acid sequence
identity with MTCP-1. The identical residues are clustered inside the barrel and 
on the surface at one side of the barrel. The overall structure of MTCP-1
superficially resembles the structures of proteins in the lipocalin family and
calycin superfamily. These proteins have diverse functions, including transport
of retinol, fatty acids, chromophores, pheromones, synthesis of prostaglandin,
immune modulation, and cell regulation. However, MTCP-1 differs in the topology
of the beta strands. The structural similarity suggests that MTCP-1 and TCL-1
form a unique family of beta barrel proteins that is predicted to bind small
hydrophobic ligands and function in cell regulation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.7.3413 
PMCID: PMC19850
PMID: 9520380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

