
1. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 1998 Jan;20(1):1-12.

Genes for all metals--a bacterial view of the periodic table. The 1996 Thom Award
Lecture.

Silver S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois, Chicago
60612-7344, USA.

Bacterial chromosomes have genes for transport proteins for inorganic nutrient
cations and oxyanions, such as NH4+, K+, Mg2+, Co2+, Fe3+, Mn2+, Zn2+ and other
trace cations, and PO4(3-), SO4(2-) and less abundant oxyanions. Together these
account for perhaps a few hundred genes in many bacteria. Bacterial plasmids
encode resistance systems for toxic metal and metalloid ions including Ag+,
AsO2-, AsO4(3-), Cd2+, Co2+, CrO4(2-), Cu2+, Hg2+, Ni2+, Pb2+, TeO3(2-), Tl+ and 
Zn2+. Most resistance systems function by energy-dependent efflux of toxic ions. 
A few involve enzymatic (mostly redox) transformations. Some of the efflux
resistance systems are ATPases and others are chemiosmotic ion/proton exchangers.
The Cd(2+)-resistance cation pump of Gram-positive bacteria is membrane P-type
ATPase, which has been labeled with 32P from [gamma-32P]ATP and drives
ATP-dependent Cd2+ (and Zn2+) transport by membrane vesicles. The genes defective
in the human hereditary diseases of copper metabolism, Menkes syndrome and
Wilson's disease, encode P-type ATPases that are similar to bacterial cadmium
ATPases. The arsenic resistance system transports arsenite [As(III)],
alternatively with the ArsB polypeptide functioning as a chemiosmotic efflux
transporter or with two polypeptides, ArsB and ArsA, functioning as an ATPase.
The third protein of the arsenic resistance system is an enzyme that reduces
intracellular arsenate [As(V)] to arsenite [As(III)], the substrate of the efflux
system. In Gram-negative cells, a three polypeptide complex functions as a
chemiosmotic cation/protein exchanger to efflux Cd2+, Zn2+ and Co2+. This pump
consists of an inner membrane (CzcA), an outer membrane (CzcC) and a
membrane-spanning (CzcB) protein that function together.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.jim.2900483 
PMID: 9523453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

