
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 3;273(14):8323-31.

Fyn, Yes, and Syk phosphorylation sites in c-Cbl map to the same tyrosine
residues that become phosphorylated in activated T cells.

Feshchenko EA(1), Langdon WY, Tsygankov AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Protooncogenic protein c-Cbl undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation in response to
stimulation through the receptors for antigens, immunoglobulins, cytokines, and
growth factors as well as through the integrins. Tyrosine phosphorylation of
c-Cbl may play a functional role in signal transduction, since c-Cbl interacts
with many crucial signaling molecules including protein-tyrosine kinases, adaptor
proteins, and phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase. Therefore, it is essential for our 
understanding of the functions of c-Cbl in signal transduction to identify its
tyrosine phosphorylation sites, to determine the protein-tyrosine kinases that
phosphorylate these sites, and to elucidate the role of these sites in the
interactions of c-Cbl with other signaling proteins. In this report, we
demonstrate that tyrosines 700, 731, and 774 are the major tyrosine
phosphorylation sites of c-Cbl in T cells in response to pervanadate treatment,
as well as in response to TcR/CD3 ligation. Coexpression experiments in COS cells
demonstrate that among T cell-expressed Src- and Syk-related protein-tyrosine
kinases, Fyn, Yes, and Syk appear to play a major role in phosphorylation of
c-Cbl, whereas Lck and Zap phosphorylate c-Cbl ineffectively. Fyn, Yes, and Syk
phosphorylate the same sites of c-Cbl that become phosphorylated in stimulated T 
cells. Among these kinases, Fyn and Yes demonstrate strong binding to c-Cbl,
which involves both phosphotyrosine-dependent and phosphotyrosine-independent
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.14.8323 
PMID: 9525940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

