
1. Transfus Clin Biol. 1997 Dec;4(6):549-57.

[Consequences for labile blood products of leukocyte depletion by whole blood
filtration using the Leucoflex LST1 in-line filter. Evaluation of the Leucoflex
LST1 filter].

[Article in French]

Janus G(1), Samson T, Faudon R, Renaudeau C, Joussemet M, Fabre G.

Author information: 
(1)Service des Contr√¥les et des HLA, CTSA Jean Julliard, Clamart.

The aim of this study is to evaluate the effects of whole blood filtration after 
a storage time of 20-24 hours at laboratory temperature using the in line filter 
Leucoflex LST1. The study concerns 49 blood donations in which we studied
leukocyte depletion, proteins (IgG, IgA, IgM, haptoglobin, C3, C4), coagulation
factors (fibrinogen, factors XII, XI, IX, VIII, V, proteins S and C, plasminogen,
tPA, D-Dimers, PDF) at day 1, the parameters of conservation (ATP, 2-3 DPG, extra
cellular potassium, haemolysis, pH) of red blood cell concentrates (RCCs) and
bacteriological sterility at day 1 and 42. Despite a correct leukocyte depletion 
(mean depletion of 3.96 log), a 10 fold higher mean level of residual
leukocytes/unit than with buffy coat poor RCC filtration (0.514.10(6) vs
0.051.10(6)) is observed. Moreover a lot of concentrates are not in accordance
with French regulations (7/42 with more than 1.10(6) leukocytes/unit). The
variation of the rates of IgG, IgA, IgM, haptoglobin, C4 and protein C is not
significant. For the others there is a slight decrease with a mean level
remaining in a physiological range. No sign of activation is noted. The sterility
assays remain negative and the RCC conservation is not altered. In conclusion,
even if the quality of the leukocyte depletion is not satisfactory in our study
and has to be stated more precisely by multicenter studies, the whole blood
filtration does not alter the quality of the derived components and allows us
obtain RCC in a bigger volume and containing more haemoglobin than with the
classical procedure after removing the buffy-coat [10].

DOI: 10.1016/s1246-7820(97)80080-8 
PMID: 9527420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

