
1. Blood. 1998 Apr 15;91(8):2998-3006.

Role of p53 in hematopoietic recovery after cytotoxic treatment.

Wlodarski P(1), Wasik M, Ratajczak MZ, Sevignani C, Hoser G, Kawiak J, Gewirtz
AM, Calabretta B, Skorski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Prompt reconstitution of hematopoiesis after cytoreductive therapy is essential
for patient recovery and may have a positive impact on long-term prognosis. We
examined the role of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in hematopoietic recovery in
vivo after treatment with the cytotoxic drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). We used p53
knock-out (p53-/-) and wild-type (p53+/+) mice injected with 5-FU as the
experimental model. Analysis of the repopulation ability and clonogenic activity 
of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and their lineage-committed descendants showed
a greater number of HSCs responsible for reconstitution of lethally irradiated
recipients in p53-/- bone marrow cells (BMCs) recovering after 5-FU treatment
than in the corresponding p53+/+ BMCs. In post-5-FU recovering BMCs, the
percentage of HSC-enriched Lin- Sca-1(+) c-Kit+ cells was about threefold higher 
in p53-/- than in p53+/+ cells. Although the percentage of the most primitive
HSCs (Lin- Sca-1(+) c-Kit+ CD34(low/-)) did not depend on p53, the percentage of 
multipotential HSCs and committed progenitors (Lin- Sca-1(+) c-Kit+ CD34(high/+))
was almost fourfold higher in post-5-FU recovering p53-/- BMCs than in their
p53+/+ counterparts. The pool of HSCs from 5-FU-treated p53-/- BMCs was exhausted
more slowly than that from the p53+/+ population as shown in vivo using
pre-spleen colony-forming unit (CFU-S) assay and in vitro using long-term
culture-initiating cells (LTC-ICs) and methylcellulose replating assays.
Clonogenic activity of various lineage-specific descendants was significantly
higher in post-5-FU regenerating p53-/- BMCs than in p53+/+ BMCs, probably
because of their increased sensitivity to growth factors. Despite all these
changes and the dramatic difference in sensitivity of p53-/- and p53+/+ BMCs to
5-FU-induced apoptosis, lineage commitment and differentiation of hematopoietic
progenitors appeared to be independent of p53 status. These studies suggest that 
suppression of p53 function facilitates hematopoietic reconstitution after
cytoreductive therapy by: (1) delaying the exhaustion of the most primitive HSC
pool, (2) stimulating the production of multipotential HSCs, (3) increasing the
sensitivity of hematopoietic cells to growth factors, and (4) decreasing the
sensitivity to apoptosis.


PMID: 9531612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

