
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Apr 14;95(8):4538-43.

Alloantigen-induced unresponsiveness in cord blood T lymphocytes is associated
with defective activation of Ras.

Porcu P(1), Gaddy J, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, and the Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Human umbilical cord blood T lymphocytes (CBTL) respond to primary
allostimulation but they do not proliferate upon rechallenge with alloantigen.
Using PKH-26-labeled cells created a proliferative block that was observed only
in CBTL that have divided during primary stimulation (PKH-26(dim)) but not in
unstimulated (PKH-26(bright)) CBTL. CBTL's secondary unresponsiveness resembles
anergy and can be overcome by treatment with phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and 
ionomycin or by high doses (50-100 units/ml) of interleukin 2. Addition of
interleukin 2 to the primary cultures does not prevent the induction of secondary
unresponsiveness. Defective Ras activation is detected in PKH-26(dim) CBTL during
secondary response to alloantigen or after antibody-mediated T cell receptor
stimulation whereas Ras is activated and proliferation is induced in CBTL during 
primary alloantigenic stimulation. Upon stimulation with PMA plus ionomycin, PMA 
plus alloantigen, but not alloantigen plus ionomycin, Ras is activated in
PKH-26(dim) CBTL, and the block in proliferation is overcome. Correction of
PKH-26(dim) CBTL's proliferative defect correlates with PMA-induced Ras
activation, suggesting a defect in the signaling pathway leading to Ras.
Ras-independent signals, necessary but not sufficient to induce PKH-26(dim) CBTL 
proliferation, are provided by alloantigen exposure, as evident by the ability of
PMA plus alloantigen but not PMA alone to overcome the proliferative block.
Functional signal transduction through CD28 in PKH-26(dim) CBTL is supported by
detectable CD28-mediated PI-3 kinase activation after PKH-26(dim) CBTL's exposure
to alloantigen or CD28 cross-linking. These results suggest that defective
activation of Ras plays a key role in PKH-26(dim) CBTL's secondary
unresponsiveness and point to a defect along the T cell receptor rather than the 
CD28 signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.8.4538 
PMCID: PMC22525
PMID: 9539773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

