
1. J Immunol. 1998 Jan 15;160(2):929-35.

Prostaglandin E2 modulation of p59fyn tyrosine kinase in T lymphocytes during
sepsis.

Choudhry MA(1), Uddin S, Sayeed MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Burn and Shock Trauma Institute, Loyola University
Chicago Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been implicated in the suppression of T cell IL-2
production and proliferation during burn and sepsis. The present study evaluated 
the potential intracellular mechanism of suppressed T cell responses by assessing
the activation of p59fyn kinase in T cells from septic rats as well as the T
cells incubated with PGE2. p59fyn is known to regulate T cell functions. Sepsis
was induced in rats by implanting fecal pellets containing Escherichia coli (150 
CFU) and Bacteroides fragilis (10(4) CFU) into the abdominal cavity. For the
assessment of PGE2 role in sepsis, a group of septic rats were treated with
indomethacin, which inhibits endogenous PGE2 synthesis. As assessed by
immunoblotting or in vitro kinase assay, a more than 40% inhibition of p59fyn
phosphorylation and kinase activity was observed in septic rat T cells compared
with the T cells from sterile or control rats. A similar inhibition in p59fyn
phosphorylation and kinase activity was observed in PGE2-treated T cells compared
with the T cells incubated in the absence of PGE2. The septic-related suppression
in p59fyn phosphorylation and kinase activity in T cells was prevented in rats
treated with indomethacin. We observed that the inhibition in p59fyn activation
in septic or PGE2-treated T cells was due primarily to a suppression in p59fyn
phosphorylation and not due to alterations in p59fyn protein expression. These
findings suggest that PGE2 released during sepsis could contribute to the
sepsis-related suppression in T cell proliferation by attenuating p59fyn
phosphorylation and its kinase activity.


PMID: 9551931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

