
1. J Immunol. 1998 Apr 15;160(8):3748-58.

Generation of the germline peripheral B cell repertoire: VH81X-lambda B cells are
unable to complete all developmental programs.

Martin F(1), Won WJ, Kearney JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 35394-3300,
USA.

The generation of VH81X heavy chain lambda-light chain-expressing B cells
(VH81X-lambda+ B cells) was studied in VH81X heavy chain transgenic mice as well 
as in VH81X JH (-/-) and VH81X JH (-/-) Ck (-/-) mice, in which competition
resulting from expression of heavy and light chains from the endogenous heavy and
kappa light chain loci was prevented. We show that although lambda light chain
gene rearrangements occur normally and give rise to light chains that associate
with the transgenic heavy chain to form surface and soluble IgM molecules,
further B cell development is almost totally blocked. The few VH81X-lambda+ B
cells that are generated progress into a mature compartment (expressing surface
CD21, CD22, CD23, and low CD24 and having a relatively long life span) but they
also have reduced levels of surface Ig receptor and express higher amounts of Fas
Ag than VH81X-kappa+ B cells. These VH81X-lambda+ B cells reach the peripheral
lymphoid organs and accumulate in the periarteriolar lymphoid sheath but are
unable to generate primary B cell follicles. In other heavy chain transgenic mice
(MD2, M167, and M54), lambda+ B cells are generated. However, they seem to be
preferentially selected in the peripheral repertoire of some transgenic heavy
chain mice (M54) but not in others (MD2, M167). These studies show that a crucial
selection step is necessary for B cell survival and maintenance in which B cells,
similar to T cells, receive signals depending on their clonal receptors.


PMID: 9558077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

