
1. J Struct Biol. 1998 Jan;121(1):9-18.

Three-dimensional reconstruction of metal replicas of the Helicobacter pylori
vacuolating cytotoxin.

Lanzavecchia S(1), Bellon PL, Lupetti P, Dallai R, Rappuoli R, Telford JL.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Strutturale e Stereochimica Inorganica, Universit√† di 
Milano, Italy.

The Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin (VacA) forms high molecular weight 
homooligomers which contain either six or seven copies of a 95-kDa polypeptide.
Electron microscope visualization of carbon platinum replicas of quick-freeze,
deepetched, preparations of VacA has revealed that the oligomers are arranged in 
flower-like structures with six- or sevenfold radial symmetry, depending on the
number of 95-kDa oligomers that they contain. Each monomer is structured in two
subunits of 37 and 58 kDa connected by an exposed loop which is a site for
proteolytic cleavage. In preparations of VacA which had undergone extensive
cleavage at the exposed loop, oligomers of both six- and seven-fold symmetry
which appeared flatter were observed; these latter were interpreted as molecules 
which had lost a complete set of one of the subunits. We exploited a 3D
reconstruction of metal replicas of quick-freeze, deep-etched, oligomers,
representing the four types of molecules described. All the molecules appear to
adhere with the same face toward the mica. Images of rotary shadowed oligomers
were processed by multivariate statistical analysis to evidence clusters of
equivalent and homogeneous oligomers. 3D reconstructions of the replicas so
classified were performed by random conical tilt tomography. In the case of
intact molecules (not cleaved) the reconstructions represent both the outer and
the inner surfaces of the mold; the latter gives a reasonably accurate sense of
the upper surface of the VacA oligomers. These data support the hypothesis that
VacA is an AB type toxin and suggest a model in which the smaller of the two
subunits is arranged in a uniform ring on the surface of the molecule in such a
way as to contribute to the overall stability of the molecule.

DOI: 10.1006/jsbi.1997.3941 
PMID: 9573616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

