
1. Int Immunol. 1998 Mar;10(3):247-57.

Regulation of T cell immunity and tolerance in vivo by CD4.

Shen X(1), KÃ¶nig R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Sealy Center for Molecular
Science, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston 77555-1070, USA.

Previous experiments showed that peptides corresponding to a major CD4-binding
site on the beta2 domain of MHC class II molecules, IAbeta134-148, enhance
responses by CD4+ T lymphocytes to antigen, allo-antigen and bacterial
superantigen in vitro, and to soluble protein in vivo. To determine whether
peptide IAbeta134-148 acted by inhibiting antigen-induced T cell tolerance,
ovalbumin-specific CD4+ lymph node (LN) T cells from TCR transgenic DO.11.10 mice
were adoptively transferred into H-2 syngeneic BALB/c recipients. Tolerance was
then induced by injecting antigen i.v. When peptide IAbeta134-148 was used to
interfere with CD4-MHC class II interactions, accumulation of clonotype-positive 
T lymphocytes in the LN and induction of T cell tolerance in vivo were delayed.
The mechanism by which peptide IAbeta134-148 inhibited T cell tolerance included 
the peptide's ability to block activation-induced cell death. Further,
antigen-specific splenic T lymphocytes were not tolerized in
IAbeta134-148-treated mice, providing a reservoir of T cells that could respond
to a secondary immunization. The results reported here suggest that participation
of the T cell co-receptor, CD4, in TCR signaling differentially affected both T
cell migration and the induction of antigen-specific tolerance. Therefore, in
this in vivo model system, the combined strength of all signals received (e.g.
via TCR, co-receptors and co-stimulators) determined whether T cell immunity or
apoptosis and tolerance resulted from antigenic stimulation. These findings are
potentially important for the development of reagents to enhance vaccine efficacy
and tumor immunity.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/10.3.247 
PMID: 9576612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

