
1. J Immunol. 1998 Jun 1;160(11):5410-9.

T cells expressing receptors of different affinity for antigen ligands reveal a
unique role for p59fyn in T cell development and optimal stimulation of T cells
by antigen.

Utting O(1), Teh SJ, Teh HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.

Signaling from the TCR involves the protein tyrosine kinase p59fyn (Fyn).
Previous studies have shown that T cell development occurs normally in Fyn-/-
mice. In this study, we investigated the requirement for Fyn in the development
and function of T cells expressing either the transgenic 2C TCR, with high
affinity for its Ag ligand, or the transgenic H-Y TCR, representative of a low
affinity TCR. Although Fyn was not essential for positive selection of thymocytes
expressing either the 2C or the H-Y TCR, it facilitated the down-regulation of
the heat-stable Ag in positively selected CD4-CD8+ thymocytes in both 2C and H-Y 
mice. Negative selection of thymocytes expressing the H-Y TCR also occurs
efficiently in Fyn-/- mice. However, in Fyn-/- mice, there was a preferential
survival of thymocytes that expressed higher levels of the CD8 coreceptor and the
transgenic TCR. Positively selected CD4-CD8+ thymocytes and peripheral T cells
expressing either the 2C or the H-Y TCR differed in their requirement of Fyn for 
optimal proliferation responses to stimulation by antigenic ligands. Whereas 2C
Fyn-/- or 2C Fyn+/+ thymocytes and peripheral T cells responded optimally to
stimulation by the specific Ag, H-Y Fyn-/- thymocytes and peripheral T cells were
hyporesponsive compared with Fyn+/+ cells. Significantly, in response to a
defined low affinity ligand, both 2C Fyn-/- thymocytes and peripheral T cells
required Fyn for optimal response to Ag stimulation. Thus, Fyn plays a role
during thymocyte development and is required for optimal responses to low
affinity/avidity ligands.


PMID: 9605142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

