
1. J Bacteriol. 1998 Jun;180(12):3114-9.

Changes in ribosomal activity of Escherichia coli cells during prolonged culture 
in sea salts medium.

Kalpaxis DL(1), Karahalios P, Papapetropoulou M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Patras, Greece. 
DIMKAL@MED.UPATRAS.GR

The activity of ribosomes from a clinical isolate of Escherichia coli, exposed to
starvation for 7 days in sea salts medium, was investigated by measuring the
kinetic parameters of ribosomal peptidyltransferase, by using the puromycin
reaction as a model reaction. No alterations in the extent of peptide bond
formation were observed during starvation. In contrast, a 50% reduction in the
kmax/Ks ratio could be seen after 24 h of starvation; an additional 6 days of
starvation resulted in a progressive but less abrupt decline in the kmax/Ks
value. (kmax is the apparent catalytic rate constant of peptidyl transferase, and
Ks is the dissociation constant of the encounter complex between acetyl
(Ac)[3H]Phe-tRNA-poly(U)-ribosome and puromycin.) Although the distribution of
ribosomal particles remained constant, a substantial decrease in the number of
ribosomes per starved cell and a clear decline in the ability of ribosomes to
bind AcPhe-tRNA were observed, particularly during the first day of starvation.
Further analysis indicated that rRNA in general, but especially 23S rRNA, was
rapidly degraded during the starvation period. In addition, the L12/L7 molar
ratio decreased from 1.5 to 1 during the initial phase of starvation (up to 24 h)
but remained constant during the subsequent starvation period. Ribosomes isolated
from 24-h-starved cells, when artificially depleted of L7/L12 protein and
reconstituted with L7/L12 protein from mid-logarithmic-phase cells, regenerated
an L12/L7 molar ratio of 1.5 and restored the peptidyltransferase activity to a
substantial level. An analogous effect of reconstitution on the efficiency of
ribosomes in binding AcPhe-tRNA was evident not only during the initial phase but
throughout the starvation period.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.12.3114-3119.1998 
PMCID: PMC107811
PMID: 9620960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

