
1. Int Immunol. 1998 Apr;10(4):453-61.

The OX-40 receptor provides a potent co-stimulatory signal capable of inducing
encephalitogenicity in myelin-specific CD4+ T cells.

Kaleeba JA(1), Offner H, Vandenbark AA, Lublinski A, Weinberg AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland 97201, USA.

The OX-40 receptor, a member of the nerve growth factor/tumor necrosis factor
receptor gene family, is expressed preferentially on autoreactive CD4+ T cells
isolated from the site of inflammation in rats with clinical signs of
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). To examine whether the OX-40
receptor has biologic relevance to T cell function, we evaluated the ability of a
rat OX-40 receptor-specific antibody to co-stimulate a myelin basic protein
(MBP)-reactive CD4+ T cell line. The anti-OX-40 antibody provided a potent
co-stimulatory signal to CD4+ T cells when added in conjunction with a
submitogenic dose of anti-CD3, but the anti-OX-40 antibody alone did not produce 
a mitogenic response. The magnitude and dose-response of anti-OX-40
co-stimulation was virtually identical to the signal delivered to T cells when
cultured with anti-CD28 in conjunction with anti-CD3. MBP-specific T cells
stimulated with both anti-CD3 and anti-OX-40 antibodies expressed increased mRNA 
and protein for IL-2 when compared to anti-CD3 alone. MBP-specific T cells
stimulated with both anti-CD3 and anti-OX-40 antibodies were also able to induce 
EAE when transferred into naive Lewis rats. In contrast, cells stimulated with
anti-CD3 alone were not encephalitogenic. These data suggest that the function of
the OX-40 receptor on activated T cells is to provide an alternative pathway for 
T cell co-stimulation that may be similar in potency to the CD28-mediated signal.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/10.4.453 
PMID: 9620601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

