
1. J Exp Med. 1998 Jun 15;187(12):1995-2007.

Expression of constitutively active Raf-1 in the mitochondria restores
antiapoptotic and leukemogenic potential of a transformation-deficient BCR/ABL
mutant.

Salomoni P(1), Wasik MA, Riedel RF, Reiss K, Choi JK, Skorski T, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The oncogenic BCR/ABL protein protects hematopoietic cells from apoptosis induced
by growth factor deprivation, but the mechanisms are only partially understood. A
BCR/ABL mutant lacking amino acids 176-426 in the BCR domain (p185DeltaBCR)
failed to protect interleukin 3-deprived 32Dcl3 myeloid precursor cells from
apoptosis, although it possessed tyrosine kinase activity and was capable of
activating the Ras-Raf-MAP kinase pathway. Compared to p185 wild-type
transfectants, p185DeltaBCR-transfected cells showed markedly reduced levels of
Bcl-2 and expressed the hypophosphorylated, proapoptotic form of BAD. Bcl-2
expression in the mitochondrial fraction of p185DeltaBCR cells was also markedly 
diminished and mitochondrial RAF was undetectable. In p185DeltaBCR cells
transfected with a mitochondria-targeted, constitutively active RAF (M-Raf) BAD
was expressed in the hyperphosphorylated form and released from the mitochondria 
into the cytosol. p185DeltaBCR/M-Raf-transfected cells were completely resistant 
to apoptosis induced by growth factor deprivation in vitro. Moreover,
constitutive expression of dominant-negative M-Raf (K375W) enhanced the
susceptibility of 32Dcl3 cells expressing wild-type BCR/ABL to apoptosis. In
severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, p185DeltaBCR/M-Raf double
transfectants were leukemogenic, whereas cells expressing only p185DeltaBCR
showed no leukemogenic potential. Together, these data support the existence of a
BCR/ABL-dependent pathway that leads to expression of an active RAF in the
mitochondria and promotes antiapoptotic and leukemia-inducing effects of BCR/ABL.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.187.12.1995 
PMCID: PMC2212373
PMID: 9625759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

