
1. EMBO J. 1998 Jun 15;17(12):3478-83.

EF-G-catalyzed translocation of anticodon stem-loop analogs of transfer RNA in
the ribosome.

Joseph S(1), Noller HF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology of RNA, Sinsheimer Laboratories, University of
California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA.

Erratum in
    EMBO J 1998 Sep 15;17(18):5519.

Translocation, catalyzed by elongation factor EF-G, is the precise movement of
the tRNA-mRNA complex within the ribosome following peptide bond formation. Here 
we examine the structural requirement for A- and P-site tRNAs in EF-G-catalyzed
translocation by substituting anticodon stem-loop (ASL) analogs for the
respective tRNAs. Translocation of mRNA and tRNA was monitored independently;
mRNA movement was assayed by toeprinting, while tRNA and ASL movement was
monitored by hydroxyl radical probing by Fe(II) tethered to the ASLs and by
chemical footprinting. Translocation depends on occupancy of both A and P sites
by tRNA bound in a mRNA-dependent fashion. The requirement for an A-site tRNA can
be satisfied by a 15 nucleotide ASL analog comprising only a 4 base pair (bp)
stem and a 7 nucleotide anticodon loop. Translocation of the ASL is both EF-G-
and GTP-dependent, and is inhibited by the translocational inhibitor
thiostrepton. These findings show that the D, T and acceptor stem regions of
A-site tRNA are not essential for EF-G-dependent translocation. In contrast, no
translocation occurs if the P-site tRNA is substituted with an ASL, indicating
that other elements of P-site tRNA structure are required for translocation. We
also tested the effect of increasing the A-site ASL stem length from 4 to 33 bp
on translocation from A to P site. Translocation efficiency decreases as the ASL 
stem extends beyond 22 bp, corresponding approximately to the maximum dimension
of tRNA along the anticodon-D arm axis. This result suggests that a structural
feature of the ribosome between the A and P sites, interferes with movement of
tRNA analogs that exceed the normal dimensions of the coaxial tRNA anticodon-D
arm.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/17.12.3478 
PMCID: PMC1170684
PMID: 9628883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

