
1. Infect Immun. 1998 Jul;66(7):3043-9.

Heterogeneous expression and release of CD14 by human gingival fibroblasts:
characterization and CD14-mediated interleukin-8 secretion in response to
lipopolysaccharide.

Sugawara S(1), Sugiyama A, Nemoto E, Rikiishi H, Takada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University School of
Dentistry, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan. sugawars@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp

To identify the role in periodontal inflammatory diseases of human gingival
fibroblasts (HGF), the major constituents of gingival tissue, the expression of
CD14, a possible lipopolysaccharide (LPS) receptor, and the release of soluble
CD14 (sCD14) by HGF were examined. Among the HGF samples from the nine donors
tested, more than 50% of the HGF from five donors expressed CD14 but less than
20% of HGF from the other four donors did so, as determined by flow cytometric
analysis. The CD14 expression on the cell surface was correlated with the
expression of CD14 mRNA. The HGF and skin and lung fibroblasts tested expressed
no CD18, which indicates that fibroblasts do not possess other LPS receptors,
such as CD11b/CD18 and CD11c/CD18. The CD14 expression by the HGF was decreased
after subculturing and was highest at the confluent stage of culture. The
treatment of high-CD14-expressing (CD14(high)) HGF with
phosphatidylinositol-phospholipase C reduced CD14 expression; this result and the
increase in a 55-kDa CD14 indicate that the membrane CD14 (mCD14) on the HGF may 
be a 55-kDa glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein. CD14(high) HGF
spontaneously released 48- and 57-kDa sCD14. The total release of sCD14 by the
HGF was augmented by gamma interferon and Escherichia coli LPS in accordance with
the increased expression of mCD14. The CD14(high) HGF secreted interleukin-8 in
response to LPS, and the secretion was completely inhibited by anti-CD14
antibody. These results suggest that (i) HGF consist of populations that are
heterogeneous on the basis of different levels of expression of CD14 and (ii)
CD14(high) HGF secrete inflammatory cytokines in response to LPS via CD14.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.66.7.3043-3049.1998 
PMCID: PMC108311
PMID: 9632564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

