
1. Immunology. 1998 Mar;93(3):366-75.

Non-responsiveness of antigen-experienced CD4 T cells reflects more stringent
co-stimulatory requirements.

Hamel ME(1), Noteboom E, Kruisbeek AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

We recently reported that previously activated T cells, irrespective of the
nature of the first stimulus they encountered, are unable to respond to
Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB), nor to soluble anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody
(mAb) presented by splenic antigen-presenting cells (APC). Such previously
activated T cells are, however, fully capable of responding to plate-bound
anti-CD3 plus splenic APC. These data suggest differential integration of the
T-cell receptor (TCR) and co-stimulatory signalling pathways in naive versus
antigen-experienced T cells. Consistent with this hypothesis, anti-CD28 mAb
restores the proliferative capacity of resting ex vivo CD45RBlo CD4+ T cells
(representing previously activated T cells) to both soluble anti-CD3 mAb and SEB.
Interestingly, mAb-mediated engagement of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4
(CTLA-4) completely negates the rescue effects mediated by anti-CD28 mAb in
CD45RBlo cells. Nevertheless, the non-responsiveness of CD45RBlo CD4+ T cells
cannot be reversed by anti-CTLA-4 Fab fragments, indicating that it is not
related to negative regulatory effects of CTLA-4 engagement itself.
Interestingly, the addition of interleukin-2 (IL-2) restores the proliferative
capacity of CD45RBlo CD4+ T cells to SEB and soluble anti-CD3 mAb. Moreover, when
rescued by IL-2, the cells are less susceptible to the negative regulatory
effects of CTLA-4 engagement. Together, these findings suggest that the
non-responsiveness of CD45RBlo CD4+ T cells to certain stimuli may be related to 
inadequate TCR signalling, primarily affecting IL-2 production.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.1998.00443.x 
PMCID: PMC1364085
PMID: 9640247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

