
1. Immunology. 1998 Mar;93(3):358-65.

Simultaneous cross-linking of CD6 and CD28 induces cell proliferation in resting 
T cells.

Osorio LM(1), Rottenberg M, Jondal M, Chow SC.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumour Biology Centre, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

In the present study, we showed that simultaneous ligation of the monoclonal
antibodies (mAb) against CD6 and CD28 induces T-cell proliferation in purified
resting T lymphocytes in the absence of T-cell receptor (TCR) occupancy. No cell 
proliferation was observed when the mAb were cross-linked alone or used
simultaneously in the soluble form. T-cell proliferation mediated through
CD6/CD28 is accompanied by the up-regulation of interleukin-2 (IL-2) mRNA and
expression of IL-2 receptors on the cell surface. In the presence of
IL-2-neutralizing mAb the proliferative response of the T cell induced through
CD6/CD28 was inhibited dose dependently. Cross-linking mAb to CD6 and CD28 alone 
or together did not down-regulate the CD3/TCR complex. T-cell proliferation
mediated through CD6/CD28 was only partially blocked by the immunosuppressive
drug, cyclosporin A (CsA), whereas anti-CD28-induced T-cell proliferation in the 
presence of the phorbol ester, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), was
unaffected. In sharp contrast T-cell proliferation mediated by anti-CD6 in the
presence of TPA was efficiently blocked by CsA. In addition, two protein kinase C
(PKC) inhibitors, GF 109203X and H-7 dose-dependently inhibited T-cell
proliferation mediated through CD6/CD28, suggesting that PKC activation may be
involved. Furthermore, there was a marked differential dose-dependent inhibitory 
effect of the PKC inhibitors on T-cell proliferation mediated by the co-ligation 
of anti-CD6 or anti-CD28 in the presence of anti-CD3, with the former being more 
sensitive to PKC inhibition. Taken collectively, our results suggest that T-cell 
activation can occur through an antigen-independent pathway by cross-linking the 
accessory molecules, CD6 and CD28, and that these two cell surface antigens may
have distinct signalling pathways.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.1998.00442.x 
PMCID: PMC1364084
PMID: 9640246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

