
1. Ter Arkh. 1998;70(5):20-4.

[HLA-antigens and some pathogenetic aspects of reactive arthritis].

[Article in Russian]

Sidel'nikova SM, Kut'ina RM, Zotikov EA.

AIM: Investigation of associations of reactive arthritis (ReA) with
histocompatibility antigens class I and II and determination of new approaches to
assessment of association ReA with antigen HLA B27.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 118 ReA patients with associated intestinal and 82 ReA
patients with associated urogenital infection were studied. The infection was
identified bacteriologically, with agglutination reaction, enzyme immunoassay,
direct and indirect immunofluorescence, culturing. HLA-antigens were studied in
lymphocytotoxic test: locus A, B and C in all the patients, DR in 65 patients.
RESULTS: ReA triggers were intracellularly parasite bacteria: facultative
parasites in the enterocolitic variant (Yersinia, as a rule), obligate parasite
in the urogenital (Chlamidia, as a rule). HLA B27 antigen was discovered in 77.5%
of patients (RR 45.8), HLA DR1--in 48.4% of patients (RR 3.3). In urogenital
variant HLA B27 antigen occurred more frequently than in enterocolitic: 87.8% (RR
95.6) versus 70.3% (RR 31.5); p < 0.01). In HLA-B27-positive patients compared to
HLA-B27-negative ones there were higher ESR (p < 0.001), leukocyte count (p <
0.05), concentrations of CRP and alpha-2-globulins (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: In HLA-B27-subjects optimal conditions exist for generalization of
obligate parasites and favorable for production of facultative ones. The degree
of association of ReA with HLA B27 antigens is dependent on adaptive features of 
microorganisms appearing in the process of evolution--obligaty and
facultativeness of their internal parasitivity.


PMID: 9644736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

