
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 7;273(32):20308-16.

Binding and phosphorylation of tubulin by G protein-coupled receptor kinases.

Carman CV(1), Som T, Kim CM, Benovic JL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry & Molecular Pharmacology and Microbiology and
Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Although the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase (betaARK) mediates agonist-dependent
phosphorylation and desensitization of G protein-coupled receptors, recent
studies suggest additional cellular functions. During our attempts to identify
novel betaARK interacting proteins, we found that the cytoskeletal protein
tubulin could specifically bind to a betaARK-coupled affinity column. In vitro
analysis demonstrated that betaARK and G protein-coupled receptor kinase-5 (GRK5)
were able to stoichiometrically phosphorylate purified tubulin dimers with a
preference for beta-tubulin and, under certain conditions, the betaIII-isotype.
Examination of the GRK/tubulin binding characteristics revealed that tubulin
dimers and assembled microtubules bind GRKs, whereas the catalytic domain of
betaARK contains the primary tubulin binding determinants. In vivo interaction of
GRK and tubulin was suggested by the following: (i) co-purification of betaARK
with tubulin from brain tissue; (ii) co-immunoprecipitation of betaARK and
tubulin from COS-1 cells; and (iii) co-localization of betaARK and GRK5 with
microtubule structures in COS-1 cells. In addition, GRK-phosphorylated tubulin
was found preferentially associated with the microtubule fraction during in vitro
assembly assays suggesting potential functional significance. These results
suggest a novel link between the cytoskeleton and GRKs that may be important for 
regulating GRK and/or tubulin function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.32.20308 
PMID: 9685381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

