
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Aug 18;95(17):10306-11.

Different requirements for EDS1 and NDR1 by disease resistance genes define at
least two R gene-mediated signaling pathways in Arabidopsis.

Aarts N(1), Metz M, Holub E, Staskawicz BJ, Daniels MJ, Parker JE.

Author information: 
(1)Sainsbury Laboratory, John Innes Centre, Colney Lane, Norwich NR4 7UH, United 
Kingdom.

The Arabidopsis genes EDS1 and NDR1 were shown previously by mutational analysis 
to encode essential components of race-specific disease resistance. Here, we
examined the relative requirements for EDS1 and NDR1 by a broad spectrum of
Resistance (R) genes present in three Arabidopsis accessions (Columbia,
Landsberg-erecta, and Wassilewskija). We show that there is a strong requirement 
for EDS1 by a subset of R loci (RPP2, RPP4, RPP5, RPP21, and RPS4), conferring
resistance to the biotrophic oomycete Peronospora parasitica, and to Pseudomonas 
bacteria expressing the avirulence gene avrRps4. The requirement for NDR1 by
these EDS1-dependent R loci is either weak or not measurable. Conversely, three
NDR1-dependent R loci, RPS2, RPM1, and RPS5, operate independently of EDS1.
Another RPP locus, RPP8, exhibits no strong exclusive requirement for EDS1 or
NDR1 in isolate-specific resistance to P. parasitica, although resistance is
compromised weakly by eds1. Similarly, resistance conditioned by two
EDS1-dependent RPP genes, RPP4 and RPP5, is impaired partially by ndr1,
implicating a degree of pathway cross-talk. Our results provide compelling
evidence for the preferential utilization of either signaling component by
particular R genes and thus define at least two disease resistance pathways. The 
data also suggest that strong dependence on EDS1 or NDR1 is governed by R protein
structural type rather than pathogen class.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.17.10306 
PMCID: PMC21504
PMID: 9707643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

