
1. Eur J Immunol. 1998 Aug;28(8):2265-75.

Roles of Lck, Syk and ZAP-70 tyrosine kinases in TCR-mediated phosphorylation of 
the adapter protein Shc.

Walk SF(1), March ME, Ravichandran KS.

Author information: 
(1)Beirne Carter Center for Immunology Research, Department of Microbiology,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22908, USA.

The adapter protein Shc has been implicated in mitogenic signaling via growth
factor receptors, antigen receptors and cytokine receptors. Recent studies have
suggested that tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc may play a key role in T
lymphocyte proliferation via interaction of phosphorylated Shc with downstream
molecules involved in activation of Ras and Myc proteins. However, the sites on
Shc that are tyrosine phosphorylated in response to TCR engagement and the
ability of different T cell tyrosine kinases to phosphorylate Shc have not been
defined. In this report, we show that during TCR signaling, the tyrosines Y239,
Y240 and Y317 of Shc are the primary sites of tyrosine phosphorylation. Mutation 
of all three tyrosines completely abolished tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc
following TCR stimulation. Our data also suggest that multiple T cell tyrosine
kinases contribute to tyrosine phosphorylation on Shc. In T cells,
CD4/Lck-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation on Shc was markedly diminished when
Y317 was mutated, suggesting a preference of Lck for the Y317 site. The
syk-family kinases (Syk and ZAP-70) were able to phosphorylate the Y239 and Y240 
sites, and less efficiently the Y317 site. Moreover, co-expression of Syk or
ZAP-70 with Lck resulted in enhanced phosphorylation of Shc on all three sites,
suggesting a synergy between the syk-family and scr-family kinases. Of the two
potential Grb2 binding sites (Y239 and Y317), Y239 appears to play a greater role
in recruiting Sos through Grb2. These studies have implications for Ras
activation and mitogenic signaling during T cell activation.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199808)28:08<2265::AID-IMMU2265>3.0.CO;2-P 
PMID: 9710204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

