
1. J Immunol. 1998 Aug 15;161(4):1930-8.

CXCR1 and CXCR2 are rapidly down-modulated by bacterial endotoxin through a
unique agonist-independent, tyrosine kinase-dependent mechanism.

Khandaker MH(1), Xu L, Rahimpour R, Mitchell G, DeVries ME, Pickering JG, Singhal
SK, Feldman RD, Kelvin DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Canada.

The expression of the seven-transmembrane domain chemokine receptors CXCR1 and
CXCR2 modulates neutrophil responsiveness to the chemoattractant IL-8 and a
number of closely related CXC chemokines. In the present study, we investigated
the mechanism by which bacterial LPS induces the down-modulation of IL-8
responsiveness and CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression on human neutrophils. Treating
neutrophils with LPS reduced IL-8R expression to 55 +/- 5% of the control within 
30 min and to 23 +/- 2% within 1 h of stimulation. Furthermore, this
down-modulation could not be attributed to increased concentrations of IL-8,
TNF-alpha, or IL-1beta, since ELISA studies indicated that LPS-stimulated
neutrophils did not release detectable amounts of these proteins before 2 h
poststimulation. The tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitors genistein and herbimycin A
attenuated the LPS-mediated down-modulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2, indicating that
the activation of a TK is required for LPS to mediate its effect. The effect of
LPS on receptor expression paralleled the hyperphosphorylation of the protein TK 
p72syk. Although IL-8 induced a comparable down-modulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2, TK
inhibitors did not attenuate this effect. These studies provide the first
evidence of an agonist-independent, TK-dependent pathway of chemokine receptor
regulation by endotoxin.


PMID: 9712063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

