
1. Int J Cancer. 1998 Sep 11;77(6):923-7.

Involvement of Shc in the signaling response of human prostate tumor cell lines
to epidermal growth factor.

Gresham J(1), Margiotta P, Palad AJ, Somers KD, Blackmore PF, Wright GL Jr,
Schellhammer PF, Wasilenko WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Eastern Virginia Medical School,
Norfolk 23507, USA.

Autocrine growth factors for the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have
been identified in prostate tumors, implicating a role for EGFR in the
progression of prostate cancer. To investigate early signaling mechanisms used by
the EGFR in prostate tumor cells, we have characterized the involvement of the
Shc (src homology 2/x-collagen related) adapter protein in EGFR signaling in
several human prostate tumor cell lines. In androgen-responsive lymph
node-prostate cancer (LNCaP) cells and androgen-insensitive PC3, DU145 and PPC-I 
cells, Shc was identified as one of the most prominent phosphotyrosine proteins
to be elevated in response to EGF. Equivalent levels of the 46- and 52-kDa Shc
isoforms were detected in all of the tumor cell lines tested. However, levels of 
the 66-kDa isoform were variable among the cell lines. In all of the tumor cell
lines, EGF caused an association between Shc and Grb2, another adapter protein
linked to cellular ras activation. Additionally, several phosphotyrosine
proteins, including a 115-120-kDa protein in EGF-treated LNCaP cells,
co-associated with Shc. The profile of these Shc-associating proteins, however,
differed among the tumor cell lines. Our results indicate that Shc is a common
downstream element of EGFR signaling in prostate tumor cells and suggest multiple
functions for Shc in prostate tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-0215(19980911)77:6<923::aid-ijc21>3.0.co;2-0 
PMID: 9714065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

