
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 1;95(18):10797-802.

Identification of HLA class II-restricted determinants of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis-derived proteins by using HLA-transgenic, class II-deficient mice.

Geluk A(1), Taneja V, van Meijgaarden KE, Zanelli E, Abou-Zeid C, Thole JE, de
Vries RR, David CS, Ottenhoff TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Bank, Leiden University Medical
Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. Geluk@Rullf2.Medfac.Leidenuniv.nl

T helper 1 cells play a major role in protective immunity against mycobacterial
pathogens. Since the antigen (Ag) specificity of CD4(+) human T cells is strongly
controlled by HLA class II polymorphism, the immunogenic potential of candidate
Ags needs to be defined in the context of HLA polymorphism. We have taken
advantage of class II-deficient (Ab0) mice, transgenic for either HLA-DRA/B1*0301
(DR3) or HLA-DQB1*0302/DQA*0301 (DQ8) alleles. In these animals, all CD4(+) T
cells are restricted by the HLA molecule. We reported previously that human
DR3-restricted T cells frequently recognize heat shock protein (hsp)65 of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and only a single hsp65 epitope, p1-20. DR3.Ab0 mice,
immunized with bacillus Calmette-Guérin or hsp65, developed T cell responses to
M. tuberculosis, and recognized the same hsp65 epitope, p1-20. Hsp65-immunized
DQ8.Ab0 mice mounted a strong response to bacillus Calmette-Guérin but not to
p1-20. Instead, we identified three new DQ8-restricted T cell epitopes in the
regions 171-200, 311-340, and 411-440. DR3.Ab0 mice immunized with a second major
M. tuberculosis protein, Ag85 (composed of 85A, 85B, and 85C), also developed T
cell responses against only one determinant, 85B p51-70, that was identified in
this study. Importantly, subsequent analysis of human T cell responses revealed
that HLA-DR3+, Ag85-reactive individuals recognize exactly the same peptide
epitope as DR3.Ab0 mice. Strikingly, both DR3-restricted T cell epitopes
represent the best DR3-binding sequences in hsp65 and 85B, revealing a strong
association between peptide-immunodominance and HLA binding affinity.
Immunization of DR3.Ab0 with the immunodominant peptides p1-20 and p51-70 induced
T cell reactivity to M. tuberculosis. Thus, for two different Ags, T cells from
DR3.Ab0 mice and HLA-DR3+ humans recognize the same immunodominant determinants. 
Our data support the use of HLA-transgenic mice in identifying human T cell
determinants for the design of new vaccines.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.18.10797 
PMCID: PMC27975
PMID: 9724784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

