
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 11;273(37):24232-8.

The phosphorylation state of CD3gamma influences T cell responsiveness and
controls T cell receptor cycling.

Dietrich J(1), Bäckström T, Lauritsen JP, Kastrup J, Christensen MD, von Bülow F,
Palmer E, Geisler C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Copenhagen,
The Panum Institute, Building 18.3, Blegdamsvej 3C, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. 
vader@biobase.dk

The T cell receptor (TCR) is internalized following activation of protein kinase 
C (PKC) via a leucine (Leu)-based motif in CD3gamma. Some studies have indicated 
that the TCR is recycled back to the cell surface following PKC-mediated
internalization. The functional state of recycled TCR and the mechanisms involved
in the sorting events following PKC-induced internalization are not known. In
this study, we demonstrated that following PKC-induced internalization, the TCR
is recycled back to the cell surface in a functional state. TCR recycling was
dependent on dephosphorylation of CD3gamma, probably mediated by the
serine/threonine protein phosphatase-2A, but independent on microtubules or actin
polymerization. Furthermore, in contrast to ligand-mediated TCR sorting,
recycling of the TCR was independent of the tyrosine phosphatase CD45 and the Src
tyrosine kinases p56(Lck) and p59(Fyn). Studies of mutated TCR and chimeric
CD4-CD3gamma molecules demonstrated that CD3gamma did not contain a recycling
signal in itself. In contrast, the only sorting information in CD3gamma was the
Leu-based motif that mediated lysosomal sorting of chimeric CD4-CD3gamma
molecules. Finally, we found a correlation between the phosphorylation state of
CD3gamma and T cell responsiveness. Based on these observations a physiological
role of CD3gamma and TCR cycling is proposed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.37.24232 
PMID: 9727047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

