
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 25;273(39):25185-90.

IkappaB kinases serve as a target of CD28 signaling.

Harhaj EW(1), Sun SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Optimal T cell activation and interleukin-2 production requires a second signal
in addition to antigen-mediated T cell receptor (TCR) signaling. The CD28
molecule has been demonstrated to act as an effective costimulatory molecule upon
binding by B7.1 or B7.2 present on antigen-presenting cells. The CD28 signal acts
in concert with the TCR signal to significantly augment activation of the
NF-kappaB family of transcription factors. The interleukin-2 gene is regulated by
NF-kappaB among other transcription factors, in part, via a CD28 responsive
element (CD28RE) present in the IL-2 promoter. Enhanced activation of NF-kappaB
by CD28 is mediated by rapid phosphorylation and proteasome-mediated degradation 
of the NF-kappaB inhibitory proteins IkappaB alpha and IkappaB beta, which allows
for accelerated nuclear expression of the liberated NF-kappaB. Herein, we provide
evidence that the catalytic activities of two recently identified IkappaB
kinases, IKKalpha and IKKbeta, are significantly elevated when T cells are
stimulated through CD28 in addition to mitogen treatment. Catalytically inactive 
forms of IKKs are able to block the in vivo phosphorylation of IkappaB alpha
induced by mitogen and CD28. Furthermore, CD28-mediated reporter gene
transactivation of the CD28RE/AP-1 composite element is consistently attenuated
by the IKK mutants. These findings suggest that cellular signaling pathways
initiated at the TCR and CD28 converge at or upstream of IKK, resulting in more
robust kinase activity and enhanced and prolonged NF-kappaB activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.39.25185 
PMID: 9737979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

