
1. Cell Immunol. 1998 Oct 10;189(1):1-9.

alpha4 and alpha5 integrins costimulate the CD3-dependent proliferation of fetal 
thymocytes.

Halvorson MJ(1), Magner W, Coligan JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, 20814, USA.

Although integrin receptors have been shown to function as costimulatory
molecules on mature thymocytes and T cells, it is not known whether these
receptors can function as costimulatory molecules on immature thymocytes.
Previous studies have shown that the expression of alpha4 and alpha5 integrins
were significantly higher on immature, adult CD4(-)CD8(-) thymocytes than on
either mature thymocytes or T cells, suggesting that these receptors are involved
in early thymocyte development. In this study, we show that day 16 fetal
thymocytes express levels of alpha4 and alpha5 equivalent to those of adult
CD4(-)CD8(-) thymocytes. Immobilized fibronectin, a ligand for alpha4 and alpha5 
integrins, was found to enhance the CD3-dependent proliferation of these fetal
thymocytes. In the presence of IL-7, the magnitude of the proliferative response 
increased with time of incubation, resulting in a dramatic increase in the
percentage of gammadelta thymocytes. The enhancement of proliferation by
fibronectin was abrogated by soluble antibodies against alpha4 and alpha5,
whereas immobilized mAb to alpha4 and alpha5 substituted for fibronectin in
enhancing CD3-dependent proliferation, demonstrating that alpha4 and alpha5
integrins were responsible for the enhanced proliferation by fibronectin.
Anti-alpha4 mAb enhanced proliferation of fetal thymocytes by 100%, whereas
anti-alpha5 mAb and anti-CD28 mAb enhanced proliferation by 25%. Other
costimulatory molecules, such as CD2, FcRgamma, and Thy-1, had no effect on the
CD3-dependent proliferation of day 16 fetal thymocytes. This study demonstrates
that alpha4 and alpha5 integrins are capable of costimulating fetal thymocytes.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.1998.1368 
PMID: 9758688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

