
1. J Chromatogr B Biomed Sci Appl. 1998 Sep 4;714(2):325-33.

Characterization of a Helicobacter pylori vaccine candidate by proteome
techniques.

McAtee CP(1), Lim MY, Fung K, Velligan M, Fry K, Chow TP, Berg DE.

Author information: 
(1)Genelabs Technologies, Redwood City, CA 94063, USA.

In a previous two-dimensional (2D) gel electrophoretic study of protein antigens 
of the gastric pathogen, Helicobacter pylori recognized by human sera, one of the
highly and consistently reactive antigens, a protein with Mr of approximately
30,000 (Spot 15) seemed to be of special interest because of low yields on
N-terminal protein sequencing. This suggested possible N-terminal modification,
as the N-terminal sequence analysis of this 30,000 protein (Spot 15) did not
provide a definitive match within the H. pylori genomic database. This protein
was isolated by 2D polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, evaluated by liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry, and found to consist of two related species of 
approximately 28,100 and 26,500. In parallel, the proteins within this spot were 
digested in situ with the endoprotease Lys-C. Analysis of the Lys-C digest by
matrix-assisted laser desorption time-of-flight mass spectrometry, peptide
mapping, and sequence analysis was conducted. Comparison of the mass and sequence
of the Lys-C peptides with those derived from a H. pylori genomic library
identified an open reading frame of approximately 300 base pairs as the source of
the Spot 15 protein. This corresponded to HP0175 in the recently reported H.
pylori genome sequence, an open reading frame with some homology to Campylobacter
jejeuni cell binding protein 2. Mass spectral and sequence analysis indicated
that Spot 15 was a processed product generated by proteolytic cleavage at both
the carboxy and amino termini of the 34 open reading frame precursor.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-4347(98)00215-1 
PMID: 9766873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

