
1. J Immunol. 1998 Oct 15;161(8):3827-35.

Qualitative and quantitative effects of CD28/B7-mediated costimulation on naive T
cells in vitro.

Manickasingham SP(1), Anderton SM, Burkhart C, Wraith DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Bristol School of
Medical Sciences, United Kingdom.

The CD28/B7 system provides costimulatory signals necessary for optimal T cell
activation. We have examined the effects of blocking B7.1 and/or B7.2 in an in
vitro system using TCR transgenic T cells specific for myelin basic protein.
Activation of naive T cells was found to be B7.2 dependent and not dependent on
the presence of B7.1 molecules. However, increasing the strength of signal
through the TCR using peptide analogues with higher affinity for MHC compensated 
for blockade of B7.2 molecules, suggesting that signal 1 alone can be sufficient 
for the activation of naive T cells. The role of B7 molecules in the
differentiation of T cells was further investigated by restimulating T cells with
fresh APC and peptide in B7-sufficient conditions. A down-regulation of IL-2 and 
IFN-gamma production by T cells primed in the presence of anti-B7.2 mAb was
partially overcome when high affinity peptide analogues were used to restimulate 
T cells. In contrast, a significant down-regulation of the differentiation of
cells producing Th-2 cytokines was observed in the presence of anti-B7 Abs.
Differentiation of IL-4-secreting cells was influenced by both B7.1 and B7.2,
while IL-5 secretion was totally dependent on B7.2. These results suggest that
B7-mediated costimulation is essential for the development of Th-2-associated
cytokines, the absence of which cannot be overcome by increasing the strength of 
the signal through the TCR.


PMID: 9780147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

