
1. J Exp Med. 1998 Nov 2;188(9):1575-86.

Interleukin 2-mediated uncoupling of T cell receptor alpha/beta from CD3
signaling.

Haughn L(1), Leung B, Boise L, Veillette A, Thompson C, Julius M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4.

T cell activation and clonal expansion is the result of the coordinated functions
of the receptors for antigen and interleukin (IL)-2. The protein tyrosine kinase 
p56(lck) is critical for the generation of signals emanating from the T cell
antigen receptor (TCR) and has also been demonstrated to play a role in IL-2
receptor signaling. We demonstrate that an IL-2-dependent, antigen-specific
CD4(+) T cell clone is not responsive to anti-TCR induced growth when propagated 
in IL-2, but remains responsive to both antigen and CD3epsilon-specific
monoclonal antibody. Survival of this IL-2-dependent clone in the absence of IL-2
was supported by overexpression of exogenous Bcl-xL. Culture of this clonal
variant in the absence of IL-2 rendered it susceptible to anti-TCR-induced
signaling, and correlated with the presence of kinase-active Lck associated with 
the plasma membrane. The same phenotype is observed in primary, resting CD4(+) T 
cells. Furthermore, the presence of kinase active Lck associated with the plasma 
membrane correlates with the presence of ZAP 70-pp21zeta complexes in both
primary T cells and T cell clones in circumstances of responsive anti-TCR
signaling. The results presented demonstrate that IL-2 signal transduction
results in the functional uncoupling of the TCR complex through altering the
subcellular distribution of kinase-active Lck.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.188.9.1575 
PMCID: PMC2212513
PMID: 9802969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

