
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 13;273(46):30630-7.

The Gab1 protein is a docking site for multiple proteins involved in signaling by
the B cell antigen receptor.

Ingham RJ(1), Holgado-Madruga M, Siu C, Wong AJ, Gold MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Gab1 is a member of the docking/scaffolding protein family which includes IRS-1, 
IRS-2, c-Cbl, p130(cas), and p62(dok). These proteins contain a variety of
protein-protein interaction motifs including multiple tyrosine residues that when
phosphorylated can act as binding sites for Src homology 2 (SH2)
domain-containing signaling proteins. We show in the RAMOS human B cell line that
Gab1 is tyrosine-phosphorylated in response to B cell antigen receptor (BCR)
engagement. Moreover, tyrosine phosphorylation of Gab1 correlated with the
binding of several SH2-containing signaling proteins to Gab1 including Shc, Grb2,
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and the SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase. Far Western
analysis showed that the SH2 domains of Shc, SHP-2, and the p85 subunit of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase could bind directly to tyrosine-phosphorylated Gab1
isolated from activated RAMOS cells. In contrast, the Grb2 SH2 domain did not
bind directly to Gab1 but instead to the Shc and SHP-2 associated with Gab1. We
also show that Gab1 is present in the membrane-enriched particulate fraction of
RAMOS cells and that Gab1/signaling protein complexes are found in this fraction 
after BCR engagement. Thus, tyrosine-phosphorylated Gab1 may recruit cytosolic
signaling proteins to cellular membranes where they can act on membrane-bound
targets. This may be a critical step in the activation of multiple BCR signaling 
pathways.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.46.30630 
PMID: 9804835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

