
1. Nat Genet. 1998 Nov;20(3):273-7.

A gene encoding a novel RFX-associated transactivator is mutated in the majority 
of MHC class II deficiency patients.

Masternak K(1), Barras E, Zufferey M, Conrad B, Corthals G, Aebersold R, Sanchez 
JC, Hochstrasser DF, Mach B, Reith W.

Author information: 
(1)Louis Jeantet Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Genetics and
Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, Switzerland.

Major histocompatibility class II (MHC-II) molecules are transmembrane proteins
that have a central role in development and control of the immune system. They
are encoded by a multigene family and their expression is tightly regulated.
MHC-II deficiency (OMIM 209920) is an autosomal recessive immunodeficiency
syndrome resulting from defects in trans-acting factors essential for
transcription of MHC-II genes. There are four genetic complementation groups (A, 
B, C and D), reflecting the existence of four MHC-II regulators. The factors
defective in groups A (CIITA), C (RFX5) and D (RFXAP) have been identified. CIITA
is a non-DNA-binding co-activator that controls the cell-type specificity and
inducibility of MHC-II expression. RFX5 and RFXAP are two subunits of RFX, a
multi-protein complex that binds the X box motif of MHC-II promoters. Mutations
in the genes encoding RFX5 (RFX5) or RFXAP (RFXAP) abolish binding of RFX (refs
7,8,12). Similar to groups C and D, group B is characterized by a defect in RFX
binding, and although it accounts for the majority of patients, the factor
defective in group B has remained unknown. We report here the isolation of RFX by
a novel single-step DNA-affinity purification approach and the identification of 
RFXANK, the gene encoding a third subunit of RFX. RFXANK restores MHC-II
expression in cell lines from patients in group B and is mutated in these
patients. RFXANK contains a protein-protein interaction region consisting of
three ankyrin repeats. Its interaction with RFX5 and RFXAP is essential for
binding of the RFX complex to MHC-II promoters.

DOI: 10.1038/3081 
PMID: 9806546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

