
1. Cytokine. 1998 Oct;10(10):747-55.

Interferon gamma impairs the ability of monocyte-derived dendritic cells to
present tumour-specific and allo-specific antigens and reduces their expression
of CD1A, CD80 AND CD4.

Rongcun Y(1), Maes H, Corsi M, Dellner F, Wen T, Kiessling R.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center (MTC), Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

Dendritic cells (DC), the most potent antigen-presenting cells found to date, can
be generated from the adherent fraction of peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) by culture with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) 
and IL-4. When interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) was added to the culture medium, the 
expression of CD1a, CD4 and CD80 markers were significantly reduced, while that
of HLA-A, B, C, MHC II (MHC-DR), CD11a and CD54 were increased. T cell
proliferation analysis showed that the DC derived from monocytes cultured with
GM-CSF, IL-4 and IFN-gamma only induced weak responses in both activated and
naive allogenic CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells when compared to the reaction elicited 
by DC cultured without IFN-gamma. Furthermore, the DC derived from cultures with 
IFN-gamma, loaded with an immunogenic peptide derived from the HER2/neu protein
[HER2 (9466)], only induced low levels of TNF release and weak proliferative
responses in a specific cytotoxic CD8(+) T lymphocyte clone. Therefore, our
results indicate that IFN-gamma negatively influences the differentiation and
function of monocyte-derived DC by affecting the expression of surface molecules 
involved in their antigen-presenting function. This supports the general
hypothesis that there exists a feedback immune regulatory mechanism between T
cells and monocytes/DC.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cyto.1998.0357 
PMID: 9811527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

