
1. Clin Exp Allergy. 1998 Oct;28(10):1264-72.

Circulating CLA+ lymphocytes from children with atopic dermatitis contain an
increased percentage of cells bearing staphylococcal-related T-cell receptor
variable segments.

Torres MJ(1), Gonzalez FJ, Corzo JL, Giron MD, Carvajal MJ, Garcia V, Pinedo A,
Martinez-Valverde A, Blanca M, Santamaria LF.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit for Allergy Diseases, Hospital Carlos Haya, MÃ¡laga, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Atopic dermatitis is an allergic T-cell mediated skin inflammation.
Staphylococcus aureus colonization is very common in cutaneous atopic dermatitis 
lesions. The cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen (CLA) is a T cell skin
homing receptor that defines T lymphocytes associated with the cutaneous immune
response.
OBJECTIVE: To study whether CLA+ T cells from atopic dermatitis children present 
a selective expression for Staphylococcus aureus-related TCR Vbeta segments.
METHODS: Peripheral blood T cells were stained with HECA-452 (anti-CLA) and a
panel of TCR Vbeta specific monoclonal antibodies and analysed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Atopic dermatitis patients have a higher percentage of circulating CLA+ 
CD3+ lymphocytes compared with healthy controls. Patients with active atopic
dermatitis during the study expressed a higher percentage of cells positive for
the TCR Vbeta2 and Vbeta5.1 segments in the CLA+ but not in the CLA- subset.
These TCR Vbetas are recognized by staphylococcal superantigens. Moreover, there 
was an increased percentage of HLA-DR+ expression by CLA+ Vbeta5.1+ T cells in
patients with active atopic dermatitis, but those patients whose eczema was
inactive had very similar values to healthy controls regarding TCR Vbeta and
HLA-DR phenotype in circulating CLA+ T lymphocytes.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that circulating skin-homing T cells of patients
with active atopic dermatitis contain an increased percentage of cells bearing
TCR Vbeta segments related with Staphylococcus aureus. Staphylococcus
superantigens may therefore trigger expansion or at least circulation of
appropriate CLA+ T cells.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2222.1998.00397.x 
PMID: 9824394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

