
1. Eur J Immunol. 1998 Nov;28(11):3857-66.

Correlation between chlamydial infection and autoimmune response: molecular
mimicry between RNA polymerase major sigma subunit from Chlamydia trachomatis and
human L7.

Hemmerich P(1), Neu E, Macht M, Peter HH, Krawinkel U, von Mikecz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, Jena, 
Germany. phemmer@imb-jena.de

L7 is one of the ribosomal proteins frequently targeted by autoantibodies in
rheumatic autoimmune diseases. A computer search revealed a region within the
immunodominant epitope of L7 (peptide II) that is highly homologous to amino acid
sequence 264-286 of the RNA polymerase major sigma factor of the eubacterium
Chlamydia trachomatis. Anti-L7 autoantibodies affinity purified from the
immunodominant epitope were able to recognize this sequence as they reacted with 
purified recombinant sigma factor. Immunofluorescence labeling experiments on C. 
trachomatis lysates revealed a punctate staining pattern of numerous spots when
incubated with the affinity-purified anti-peptide II autoantibodies. Binding of
autoantibodies to peptide II was inhibited by the homologous sigma peptide. This 
is the first demonstration of epitope mimicry between a human and a chlamydial
protein on the level of B cells. Antibody screening revealed a significant
correlation between the presence of anti-L7 autoantibodies and C. trachomatis
infection in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and mixed connective
tissue disease. Our results suggest that molecular mimicry is involved in the
initiation of anti-L7 autoantibody response and may represent a first glance into
the immunopathology of Chlamydia with respect to systemic rheumatic diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199811)28:11<3857::AID-IMMU3857>3.0.CO;2-M 
PMID: 9842929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

