
1. Dig Dis Sci. 1998 Dec;43(12):2733-7.

Halitosis and Helicobacter pylori: a possible relationship.

Ierardi E(1), Amoruso A, La Notte T, Francavilla R, Castellaneta S, Marrazza E,
Monno RA, Francavilla A.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Gastroenterologia, Istituto di Pediatria Sociale e Preventiva,
Universita' di Bari, Italy.

With the aim of investigating a possible relationship between "objective"
halitosis (established by sulfide levels in the breath) and Helicobacter pylori, 
we performed a study in 58 dyspeptic patients reported to suffer from "bad
breath." Furthermore, we evaluated the effects on halitosis of eradication
therapy (only for H. pylori-positive patients) and chlorhexidine antiseptic mouth
rinses (in all patients). Sulfide compound assay indicated objective halitosis in
52/58 patients, 30 of whom were positive and 22 negative for H. pylori. In 19/30 
eradication by double therapy provoked a decrease to below the cutoff value of
sulfide levels in 15. In the other 11 of the 30 subjects, in whom H. pylori
positivity persisted, halitosis parameters did not change. Chlorexidine reduced
sulfides to below the cutoff value in 16/22 H. pylori-negative patients, but did 
not provoke any change in the 11 unsuccessfully treated H. pylori-positive
subjects. In these, objective halitosis disappeared only after a successful
eradication by triple therapy (9/11). Our results show a possible association
between halitosis and H. pylori since bacterial eradication may resolve the
symptom. Antiseptic mouthwashes may be effective only in absence of H. pylori,
when halitosis may be due to oral putrefactive microbial activity. In a small
number of subjects the cause and treatment of halitosis need to be clarified.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1026619831442 
PMID: 9881507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

