
1. J Immunol. 1999 Jan 15;162(2):659-68.

T cell activation signals up-regulate p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
activity and induce TNF-alpha production in a manner distinct from LPS activation
of monocytes.

Schafer PH(1), Wang L, Wadsworth SA, Davis JE, Siekierka JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Research, R.W. Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute,
Raritan, NJ 08869, USA.

p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) (p38) is involved in various cellular
responses, including LPS stimulation of monocytes, resulting in production of
proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-alpha. However, the function of p38 during 
antigenic stimulation of T cells is largely unknown. Stimulation of the human Th 
cell clone HA-1.70 with either the superantigen staphylococcal enterotoxin B
(SEB) or with a specific antigenic peptide resulted in p38 activation and the
release of TNF-alpha. MAPK-activated protein kinase-2 (MAPKAPK-2), an in vivo
substrate for p38, was also activated by T cell signaling. SB 203580, a selective
inhibitor of p38, blocked p38 and MAPKAPK-2 activation in the T cell clone but
did not completely inhibit TNF-alpha release. PD 098059, a selective inhibitor of
MAPK kinase 1 (MEK1), blocked activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) and partially blocked TNF-alpha production by the clone. In human
peripheral T cells, p38 was not activated by SEB, but rather by CD28
cross-linking, whereas in the human leukemic T cell line Jurkat, p38 was
activated by CD3 and CD28 cross-linking in an additive fashion. TNF-alpha
production by peripheral T cells in response to SEB and anti-CD28 mAb correlated 
more closely with ERK activity than with p38 activity. Therefore, various forms
of T cell stimulation can activate the p38 pathway depending on the cells
examined. Furthermore, unlike LPS-stimulated monocytes, TNF-alpha production by T
cells is only partially p38-dependent.


PMID: 9916683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

