
1. Anal Biochem. 1999 Feb 1;267(1):169-84.

Spontaneous alpha-N-6-phosphogluconoylation of a "His tag" in Escherichia coli:
the cause of extra mass of 258 or 178 Da in fusion proteins.

Geoghegan KF(1), Dixon HB, Rosner PJ, Hoth LR, Lanzetti AJ, Borzilleri KA, Marr
ES, Pezzullo LH, Martin LB, LeMotte PK, McColl AS, Kamath AV, Stroh JG.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research Division, Pfizer Inc., Eastern Point Road, Groton,
Connecticut, 06340, USA.kieran_f_geoghegan@groton.pfizer.com

Several proteins expressed in Escherichia coli with the N-terminus
Gly-Ser-Ser-[His]6- consisted partly (up to 20%) of material with 178 Da of
excess mass, sometimes accompanied by a smaller fraction with an excess 258 Da.
The preponderance of unmodified material excluded mutation, and the extra masses 
were attributed to posttranslational modifications. As both types of modified
protein were N-terminally blocked, the alpha-amino group was modified in each
case. Phosphatase treatment converted +258-Da protein into +178-Da protein. The
modified His tags were isolated, and the mass of the +178-Da modification
estimated as 178.06 +/- 0.02 Da by tandem mass spectrometry. As the main
modification remained at +178 Da in 15N-substituted protein, it was deemed
nitrogen-free and possibly carbohydrate-like. Limited periodate oxidations
suggested that the +258-Da modification was acylation with a 6-phosphohexonic
acid, and that the +178-Da modification resulted from its dephosphorylation. NMR 
spectra of cell-derived +178-Da His tag and synthetic alpha-N-d-gluconoyl-His tag
were identical. Together, these results suggested that the +258-Da modification
was addition of a 6-phosphogluconoyl group. A plausible mechanism was acylation
by 6-phosphoglucono-1,5-lactone, produced from glucose 6-phosphate by
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.49). Supporting this, treating a
His-tagged protein with excess d-glucono-1,5-lactone gave only N-terminal
gluconoylation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/abio.1998.2990 
PMID: 9918669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

