
1. J Hematother. 1998 Dec;7(6):481-91.

Ex vivo expansion and differentiation of unselected peripheral blood progenitor
cells in serum-free media.

Paquette RL(1), Gonzales E, Yoshimura R, Tran L, Choi R, Baldwin G, Slamon DJ,
Glaspy J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, 90095, USA.

The ability to expand and differentiate unselected PBPC was investigated. Cells
were grown in serum-free media containing stem cell factor, GCSF and
megakaryocyte growth and development factor (pegylated PEG-rHuMGDF) with or
without supplemental serum. Optimal proliferation occurred when PBPC were
cultured without prior Ficoll-Paque separation in serum-free media. Cell yields
after 17 days of culture were proportional to the percentage of CD34+ cells in
the starting population and were 1170+/-302-fold higher than the starting numbers
of CD34+ cells. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming units increased over 12
days of culture, whereas the numbers of erythroid colony-forming cells peaked
between 4 and 7 days. Elimination of PEG-rHuMGDF from cell cultures resulted in
significantly lower yields of myeloid and erythroid colony-forming cells and
total cell numbers. Cell differentiation into neutrophils was indicated by
progressive increases in CD11b, CD15, and CD66b expression. Expanded neutrophils 
phagocytosed and killed bacteria as efficiently as neutrophils from normal
donors. Large-scale expansion studies yielded similar proliferation and
differentiation results as parallel small-scale cultures. Therefore, unselected
PBPC can be efficiently expanded and differentiated into large numbers of
functional mature neutrophils.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.1.1998.7.481 
PMID: 9919941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

