
1. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 1998 Dec;383(6):460-5.

Major injury induces increased production of interleukin-10 in human granulocyte 
fractions.

Köller M(1), Clasbrummel B, Kollig E, Hahn MP, Muhr G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Surgical Research, BG Kliniken Bergmannsheil,
Universitätsklinik, Bochum, Germany.

Patients with severe trauma or polytrauma frequently acquire alterations in
immune functions which are correlated to dysbalanced cytokine synthesis. In these
settings the role of polymorphonuclear neutrophil granulocytes (PMN) as
cytokine-producing cells is less well characterized. The immunosuppressive role
of interleukin (IL)-10 is well known, and increased systemic IL-10 levels are
related to the severity of injury and to posttraumatic complications. We
determined concentrations of IL-10 in culture supernatants of 30 individual PMN
fractions isolated from 18 severely traumatized patients (15 polytraumata, Injury
Severity Score: 18-41, 3 severely burned patients) admitted to intensive care
units. IL-10 was analyzed by ELISA (R&D Systems, Wiesbaden, Germany). PMN were
isolated from EDTA-anticoagulated peripheral blood employing a one-step procedure
based on a discontinuous double Ficoll gradient. The cells [1 x 10(6)/ml RPMI
1640 supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and 25 mM
N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-piperazine-N'-(2-ethanesulfonic acid] were stimulated with
0.05% heat-killed Staphylococcus aureus (Pansorbin, Calbiochem-Novabiochem, Bad
Soden, Germany) for 24 h using cell culture conditions. Our results show that PMN
fractions of traumatized patients produce significantly (P<0.008) higher amounts 
of IL-10 (354+/-95 pg/ml, n = 30) than normal healthy donor cells (125+/-95
pg/ml, n = 7). IL-10 release from PMN fractions exceeded the release from
isolated patients' peripheral blood mononuclear cells induced by similar
stimulation or by stimulation with toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (10 ng) and
concanavalin A (2 microg). Our results provide evidence that PMN fractions play
an active role in the development of posttraumatic immunosuppression by autocrine
or paracrine mechanisms, for example, by suppressing one's own antimicrobial
activities or determining the development of T-cell responses via their ability
to release IL-10.

DOI: 10.1007/s004230050161 
PMID: 9921948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

