
1. J Immunol. 1999 Feb 1;162(3):1859-67.

B7.2 has opposing roles during the activation versus effector stages of
experimental autoimmune thyroiditis.

Peterson KE(1), Sharp GC, Tang H, Braley-Mullen H.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Pathology, and Internal 
Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

APCs provide costimulatory and down-regulatory signals to Ag-activated T cells
through interactions between B7.1 and B7.2 on APCs with either CD28 or CTL Ag-4
expressed on T cells. Recipients of mouse thyroglobulin (MTg)-primed spleen cells
activated in the presence of anti-B7.2 had decreased experimental autoimmune
thyroiditis (EAT) severity compared with recipients of cells cultured with
control rat Ig or anti-B7.1. Blocking B7.2 during in vivo priming also suppressed
the ability of MTg-primed spleen cells to transfer EAT, implicating a role for
B7.2 for priming and in vitro activation of EAT effector cells. In contrast,
administration of anti-B7.2 or anti-B7.2 Fab to recipients of MTg-activated
spleen cells increased the severity of EAT compared with recipients receiving
control Ig. Thyroids from anti-B7.2-treated recipients had increased expression
of IL-4 mRNA compared with thyroids from rat Ig-treated controls. Both B7.1 and
B7.2 molecules were expressed in the thyroids of mice with EAT, although B7.2 was
more prevalent than B7.1. Administration of both anti-B7.1 and anti-B7.2 to
recipient mice suppressed the development of EAT, while anti-B7.1 treatment alone
had no effect on EAT severity. The suppression of EAT was not observed when
anti-B7.1 and anti-B7.2 treatment was delayed until 7 days after cell transfer,
suggesting a requirement for B7 in the initiation of EAT in recipient mice. These
results suggest that costimulation is required during the effector phase of EAT
and that B7.2 may have opposing roles in the activation versus effector stages of
autoreactive T cells.


PMID: 9973452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

