
1. J Immunol. 1999 Feb 1;162(3):1408-14.

Protein interactions of Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing inositol
phosphatase (SHIP): association with Shc displaces SHIP from FcgammaRIIb in B
cells.

Tridandapani S(1), Pradhan M, LaDine JR, Garber S, Anderson CL, Coggeshall KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ohio State University, OH 43210, USA.

Our recent studies revealed that the inositol phosphatase Src homology 2 (SH2)
domain-containing inositol phosphatase (SHIP) is phosphorylated and associated
with Shc exclusively under negative signaling conditions in B cells, which is due
to recruitment of the SHIP SH2 domain to the FcgammaRIIb. In addition, we
reported that SHIP-Shc interaction involves both SHIP SH2 and Shc phosphotyrosine
binding domains. These findings reveal a paradox in which the single SH2 domain
of SHIP is simultaneously engaged to two different proteins: Shc and FcgammaRIIb.
To resolve this paradox, we examined the protein interactions of SHIP. Our
results demonstrated that isolated FcgammaRIIb contains SHIP but not Shc;
likewise, Shc isolates contain SHIP but not FcgammaRIIb. In contrast, SHIP
isolates contain both proteins, revealing two separate pools of SHIP: one bound
to FcgammaRIIb and one bound to Shc. Kinetic studies reveal rapid SHIP
association with FcgammaRIIb but slower and more transient association with Shc. 
Affinity measurements using a recombinant SHIP SH2 domain and phosphopeptides
derived from FcgammaRIIb (corresponding to Y273) and Shc (corresponding to Y317) 
revealed an approximately equal rate of binding but a 10-fold faster dissociation
rate for FcgammaRIIb compared with Shc phosphopeptide and yielding in an affinity
of 2.1 microM for FcgammaRIIb and 0.26 microM for Shc. These findings are
consistent with a model in which SHIP transiently associates with FcgammaRIIb to 
promote SHIP phosphorylation, whereupon SHIP binds to Shc and dissociates from
FcgammaRIIb.


PMID: 9973396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

