
1. autophagy. 2016;12(1):1-222. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1100356.

guidelines use interpretation assays monitoring autophagy (3rd
edition).

klionsky dj, abdelmohsen k, abe a, abedin mj, abeliovich h, acevedo arozena a,
adachi h, adams cm, adams pd, adeli k, adhihetty pj, adler sg, agam g, agarwal r,
aghi mk, agnello m, agostinis p, aguilar pv, aguirre-ghiso j, airoldi em,
ait-si-ali s, akematsu t, akporiaye et, al-rubeai m, albaiceta gm, albanese c,
albani d, albert ml, aldudo j, algül h, alirezaei m, alloza i, almasan a,
almonte-beceril m, alnemri es, alonso c, altan-bonnet n, altieri dc, alvarez s,
alvarez-erviti l, alves s, amadoro g, amano a, amantini c, ambrosio s, amelio i, 
amer ao, amessou m, amon a, z, anania fa, andersen su, andley up, andreadi ck,
andrieu-abadie n, anel a, ann dk, anoopkumar-dukie s, antonioli m, aoki h,
apostolova n, aquila s, aquilano k, araki k, arama e, aranda a, araya j, arcaro
a, arias e, arimoto h, ariosa ar, armstrong jl, arnould t, arsov i, asanuma k,
askanas v, asselin e, atarashi r, atherton ss, atkin jd, attardi ld, auberger p, 
auburger g, aurelian l, autelli r, avagliano l, avantaggiati ml, avrahami l,
awale s, azad n, bachetti t, backer jm, bae dh, bae js, bae on, bae sh, baehrecke
eh, baek sh, baghdiguian s, bagniewska-zadworna a, bai h, bai j, bai xy, bailly
y, balaji kn, balduini w, ballabio a, balzan r, banerjee r, bánhegyi g, bao h,
barbeau b, barrachina md, barreiro e, bartel b, bartolomé a, bassham dc, bassi
mt, bast rc jr, basu a, batista mt, batoko h, battino m, bauckman k, baumgarner
bl, bayer ku, beale r, beaulieu jf, beck gr jr, becker c, beckham jd, bédard pa, 
bednarski pj, begley tj, behl c, behrends c, behrens gm, behrns ke, bejarano e,
belaid a, belleudi f, bénard g, berchem g, bergamaschi d, bergami m, berkhout b, 
berliocchi l, bernard a, bernard m, bernassola f, bertolotti a, bess as, besteiro
s, bettuzzi s, bhalla s, bhattacharyya s, bhutia sk, biagosch c, bianchi mw,
biard-piechaczyk m, billes v, bincoletto c, bingol b, bird sw, bitoun m, bjedov
i, blackstone c, blanc l, blanco ga, blomhoff hk, boada-romero e, böckler s, boes
m, boesze-battaglia k, boise lh, bolino a, boman a, bonaldo p, bordi m, bosch j, 
botana lm, botti j, bou g, bouché m, bouchecareilh m, boucher mj, boulton me,
bouret sg, boya p, boyer-guittaut m, bozhkov pv, brady n, braga vm, brancolini c,
braus gh, bravo-san pedro jm, brennan la, bresnick eh, brest p, bridges d,
bringer ma, brini m, brito gc, brodin b, brookes ps, brown ej, brown k, broxmeyer
he, bruhat a, brum pc, brumell jh, brunetti-pierri n, bryson-richardson rj, buch 
s, buchan am, budak h, bulavin dv, bultman sj, bultynck g, bumbasirevic v,
burelle y, burke re, burmeister m, bütikofer p, caberlotto l, cadwell k, cahova
m, cai d, cai j, cai q, calatayud s, camougrand n, campanella m, campbell gr,
campbell m, campello s, candau r, caniggia i, cantoni l, cao l, caplan ab,
caraglia m, cardinali c, cardoso sm, carew js, carleton la, carlin cr, carloni s,
carlsson sr, carmona-gutierrez d, carneiro la, carnevali o, carra s, carrier a,
carroll b, casas c, casas j, cassinelli g, castets p, castro-obregon s, cavallini
g, ceccherini i, cecconi f, cederbaum ai, ceña v, cenci s, cerella c, cervia d,
cetrullo s, chaachouay h, chae hj, chagin as, chai cy, chakrabarti g, chamilos g,
chan ey, chan mt, chandra d, chandra p, chang cp, chang rc, chang ty, chatham jc,
chatterjee s, chauhan s, che y, cheetham me, cheluvappa r, chen cj, chen g, chen 
gc, chen g, chen h, chen jw, chen jk, chen m, chen m, chen p, chen q, chen q,
chen sd, chen s, chen ss, chen w, chen wj, chen wq, chen w, chen x, chen yh, chen
yg, chen y, chen y, chen y, chen yj, chen yq, chen y, chen z, chen z, cheng a,
cheng ch, cheng h, cheong h, cherry s, chesney j, cheung ch, chevet e, chi hc,
chi sg, chiacchiera f, chiang hl, chiarelli r, chiariello m, chieppa m, chin ls, 
chiong m, chiu gn, cho dh, cho sg, cho wc, cho yy, cho ys, choi am, choi ej, choi
ek, choi j, choi me, choi si, chou tf, chouaib s, choubey d, choubey v, chow kc, 
chowdhury k, chu ct, chuang th, chun t, chung h, chung t, chung yl, chwae yj,
cianfanelli v, ciarcia r, ciechomska ia, ciriolo mr, cirone m, claerhout s,
clague mj, clària j, clarke pg, clarke r, clementi e, cleyrat c, cnop m, coccia
em, cocco t, codogno p, coers j, cohen ee, colecchia d, coletto l, coll ns,
colucci-guyon e, comincini s, condello m, cook kl, coombs gh, cooper cd, cooper
jm, coppens i, corasaniti mt, corazzari m, corbalan r, corcelle-termeau e,
cordero md, corral-ramos c, corti o, cossarizza a, costelli p, costes s, cotman
sl, coto-montes a, cottet s, couve e, covey lr, cowart la, cox js, coxon fp,
coyne cb, cragg ms, craven rj, crepaldi t, crespo jl, criollo a, crippa v, cruz
mt, cuervo am, cuezva jm, cui t, cutillas pr, czaja mj, czyzyk-krzeska mf, dagda 
rk, dahmen u, dai c, dai w, dai y, dalby kn, dalla valle l, dalmasso g, d'amelio 
m, damme m, darfeuille-michaud a, dargemont c, darley-usmar vm, dasarathy s,
dasgupta b, dash s, dass cr, davey hm, davids lm, dávila d, davis rj, dawson tm, 
dawson vl, daza p, de belleroche j, de figueiredo p, de figueiredo rc, de la
fuente j, de martino l, de matteis a, de meyer gr, de milito a, de santi m, de
souza w, de tata v, de zio d, debnath j, dechant r, decuypere jp, deegan s, dehay
b, del bello b, del dp, delage-mourroux r, delbridge lm, deldicque l,
delorme-axford e, deng y, dengjel j, denizot m, dent p, der cj, deretic v,
derrien b, deutsch e, devarenne tp, devenish rj, di bartolomeo s, di daniele n,
di domenico f, di nardo a, di paola s, di pietro a, di renzo l, diantonio a,
díaz-araya g, díaz-laviada i, diaz-meco mt, diaz-nido j, dickey ca, dickson rc,
diederich m, digard p, dikic i, dinesh-kumar sp, ding c, ding wx, ding z, dini l,
distler jh, diwan a, djavaheri-mergny m, dmytruk k, dobson rc, doetsch v,
dokladny k, dokudovskaya s, donadelli m, dong xc, dong x, dong z, donohue tm jr, 
doran ks, d'orazi g, dorn gw 2nd, dosenko v, dridi s, drucker l, du j, du ll, du 
l, du toit a, dua p, duan l, duann p, dubey vk, duchen mr, duchosal ma, duez h,
dugail i, dumit vi, duncan mc, dunlop ea, dunn wa jr, dupont n, dupuis l, durán
rv, durcan tm, duvezin-caubet s, duvvuri u, eapen v, ebrahimi-fakhari d, echard
a, eckhart l, edelstein cl, edinger al, eichinger l, eisenberg t,
eisenberg-lerner a, eissa nt, el-deiry ws, el-khoury v, elazar z, eldar-finkelman
h, elliott cj, emanuele e, emmenegger u, engedal n, engelbrecht am, engelender s,
enserink jm, erdmann r, erenpreisa j, eri r, eriksen jl, erman a, escalante r,
eskelinen el, espert l, esteban-martínez l, evans tj, fabri m, fabrias g, fabrizi
c, facchiano a, færgeman nj, faggioni a, fairlie wd, fan c, fan d, fan j, fang s,
fanto m, fanzani a, farkas t, faure m, favier fb, fearnhead h, federici m, fei e,
felizardo tc, feng h, feng y, feng y, ferguson ta, fernández áf,
fernandez-barrena mg, fernandez-checa jc, fernández-lópez a, fernandez-zapico me,
feron o, ferraro e, ferreira-halder cv, fesus l, feuer r, fiesel fc,
filippi-chiela ec, filomeni g, fimia gm, fingert jh, finkbeiner s, finkel t,
fiorito f, fisher pb, flajolet m, flamigni f, florey o, florio s, floto ra,
folini m, follo c, fon ea, fornai f, fortunato f, fraldi a, franco r, francois a,
françois a, frankel lb, fraser id, frey n, freyssenet dg, frezza c, friedman sl, 
frigo de, fu d, fuentes jm, fueyo j, fujitani y, fujiwara y, fujiya m, fukuda m, 
fulda s, fusco c, gabryel b, gaestel m, gailly p, gajewska m, galadari s, galili 
g, galindo i, galindo mf, galliciotti g, galluzzi l, galluzzi l, galy v, gammoh
n, gandy s, ganesan ak, ganesan s, ganley ig, gannagé m, gao fb, gao f, gao jx,
garcía nannig l, garcía véscovi e, garcia-macía m, garcia-ruiz c, garg ad, garg
pk, gargini r, gassen nc, gatica d, gatti e, gavard j, gavathiotis e, ge l, ge p,
ge s, gean pw, gelmetti v, genazzani aa, geng j, genschik p, gerner l, gestwicki 
je, gewirtz da, ghavami s, ghigo e, ghosh d, giammarioli am, giampieri f,
giampietri c, giatromanolaki a, gibbings dj, gibellini l, gibson sb, ginet v,
giordano a, giorgini f, giovannetti e, girardin se, gispert s, giuliano s,
gladson cl, glavic a, gleave m, godefroy n, gogal rm jr, gokulan k, goldman gh,
goletti d, goligorsky ms, gomes av, gomes lc, gomez h, gomez-manzano c,
gómez-sánchez r, gonçalves da, goncu e, gong q, gongora c, gonzalez cb,
gonzalez-alegre p, gonzalez-cabo p, gonzález-polo ra, goping is, gorbea c,
gorbunov nv, goring dr, gorman am, gorski sm, goruppi s, goto-yamada s, gotor c, 
gottlieb ra, gozes i, gozuacik d, graba y, graef m, granato ge, grant gd, grant
s, gravina gl, green dr, greenhough a, greenwood mt, grimaldi b, gros f, grose c,
groulx jf, gruber f, grumati p, grune t, guan jl, guan kl, guerra b, guillen c,
gulshan k, gunst j, guo c, guo l, guo m, guo w, guo xg, gust aa, gustafsson åb,
gutierrez e, gutierrez mg, gwak hs, haas a, haber je, hadano s, hagedorn m, hahn 
dr, halayko aj, hamacher-brady a, hamada k, hamai a, hamann a, hamasaki m, hamer 
i, hamid q, hammond em, han f, han w, handa jt, hanover ja, hansen m, harada m,
harhaji-trajkovic l, harper jw, harrath ah, harris al, harris j, hasler u,
hasselblatt p, hasui k, hawley rg, hawley ts, c, cy, f, g, rr, 
xh, yw, yy, heath jk, hébert mj, heinzen ra, helgason gv, hensel m, henske 
ep, c, herman pk, hernández a, hernandez c, hernández-tiedra s, hetz c,
hiesinger pr, higaki k, hilfiker s, hill bg, hill ja, hill wd, hino k, hofius d, 
hofman p, höglinger gu, höhfeld j, holz mk, hong y, hood da, hoozemans jj, hoppe 
t, hsu c, hsu cy, hsu lc, hu d, hu g, hu hm, hu h, hu mc, hu yc, hu zw, hua f,
hua y, huang c, huang hl, huang kh, huang ky, huang s, huang s, huang wp, huang
yr, huang y, huang y, huber tb, huebbe p, huh wk, hulmi jj, hur gm, hurley jh,
husak z, hussain sn, hussain s, hwang jj, hwang s, hwang ti, ichihara a, imai y, 
imbriano c, inomata m, t, iovane v, iovanna jl, iozzo rv, ip ny, irazoqui
je, iribarren p, isaka y, isakovic aj, ischiropoulos h, isenberg js, ishaq m,
ishida h, ishii i, ishmael je, isidoro c, isobe k, isono e, issazadeh-navikas s, 
itahana k, itakura e, ivanov ai, iyer ak, izquierdo jm, izumi y, izzo v, jäättelä
m, jaber n, jackson dj, jackson wt, jacob tg, jacques ts, jagannath c, jain a,
jana nr, jang bk, jani a, janji b, jannig pr, jansson pj, jean s, jendrach m,
jeon jh, jessen n, jeung eb, jia k, jia l, jiang h, jiang h, jiang l, jiang t,
jiang x, jiang x, jiang x, jiang y, jiang y, jiménez a, jin c, jin h, jin l, jin 
m, jin s, jinwal uk, jo ek, johansen t, johnson de, johnson gv, johnson jd,
jonasch e, jones c, joosten la, jordan j, joseph am, joseph b, joubert am, ju d, 
ju j, juan hf, juenemann k, juhász g, jung hs, jung ju, jung yk, jungbluth h,
justice mj, jutten b, kaakoush no, kaarniranta k, kaasik a, kabuta t, kaeffer b, 
kågedal k, kahana a, kajimura s, kakhlon o, kalia m, kalvakolanu dv, kamada y,
kambas k, kaminskyy vo, kampinga hh, kandouz m, kang c, kang r, kang tc, kanki t,
kanneganti td, kanno h, kanthasamy ag, kantorow m, kaparakis-liaskos m, kapuy o, 
karantza v, karim mr, karmakar p, kaser a, kaushik s, kawula t, kaynar am, ke py,
ke zj, kehrl jh, keller ke, kemper jk, kenworthy ak, kepp o, kern a, kesari s,
kessel d, ketteler r, kettelhut ido c, khambu b, khan mm, khandelwal vk, khare s,
kiang jg, kiger aa, kihara a, kim al, kim ch, kim dr, kim dh, kim ek, kim hy, kim
hr, kim js, kim jh, kim jc, kim jh, kim kw, kim md, kim mm, kim pk, kim sw, kim
sy, kim ys, kim y, kimchi a, kimmelman ac, kimura t, king js, kirkegaard k,
kirkin v, kirshenbaum la, kishi s, kitajima y, kitamoto k, kitaoka y, kitazato k,
kley ra, klimecki wt, klinkenberg m, klucken j, knævelsrud h, knecht e, knuppertz
l, ko jl, kobayashi s, koch jc, koechlin-ramonatxo c, koenig u, koh yh, köhler k,
kohlwein sd, koike m, komatsu m, kominami e, kong d, kong hj, konstantakou eg,
kopp bt, korcsmaros t, korhonen l, korolchuk vi, koshkina nv, kou y, koukourakis 
mi, koumenis c, kovács al, kovács t, kovacs wj, koya d, kraft c, krainc d, kramer
h, kravic-stevovic t, krek w, kretz-remy c, krick r, krishnamurthy m,
kriston-vizi j, kroemer g, kruer mc, kruger r, ktistakis nt, kuchitsu k, kuhn c, 
kumar ap, kumar a, kumar a, kumar d, kumar d, kumar r, kumar s, kundu m, kung hj,
kuno a, kuo sh, kuret j, kurz t, kwok t, kwon tk, kwon yt, kyrmizi i, la spada
ar, lafont f, lahm t, lakkaraju a, lam t, lamark t, lancel s, landowski th, lane 
dj, lane jd, lanzi c, lapaquette p, lapierre lr, laporte j, laukkarinen j, laurie
gw, lavandero s, lavie l, lavoie mj, law by, law hk, law kb, layfield r, lazo pa,
le cam l, le roch kg, le stunff h, leardkamolkarn v, lecuit m, lee bh, lee ch,
lee ef, lee gm, lee hj, lee h, lee jk, lee j, lee jh, lee jh, lee m, lee ms, lee 
pj, lee sw, lee sj, lee sj, lee sy, lee sh, lee ss, lee sj, lee s, lee yr, lee
yj, lee yh, leeuwenburgh c, lefort s, legouis r, lei j, lei qy, leib da,
leibowitz g, lekli i, lemaire sd, lemasters jj, lemberg mk, lemoine a, leng s,
lenz g, lenzi p, lerman lo, lettieri barbato d, leu ji, leung hy, levine b, lewis
pa, lezoualc'h f, li c, li f, li fj, li j, li k, li l, li m, li m, li q, li r, li
s, li w, li w, li x, li y, lian j, liang c, liang q, liao y, liberal j, liberski 
pp, lie p, lieberman ap, lim hj, lim kl, lim k, lima rt, lin cs, lin cf, lin f,
lin f, lin fc, lin k, lin kh, lin ph, lin t, lin ww, lin ys, lin y, linden r,
lindholm d, lindqvist lm, lingor p, linkermann a, liotta la, lipinski mm, lira
va, lisanti mp, liton pb, liu b, liu c, liu cf, liu f, liu hj, liu j, liu jj, liu
jl, liu k, liu l, liu l, liu q, liu ry, liu s, liu s, liu w, liu xd, liu x, liu
xh, liu x, liu x, liu x, liu y, liu y, liu z, liu z, liuzzi jp, lizard g, ljujic 
m, lodhi ij, logue se, lokeshwar bl, long yc, lonial s, loos b, lópez-otín c,
lópez-vicario c, lorente m, lorenzi pl, lõrincz p, los m, lotze mt, lovat pe, lu 
b, lu b, lu j, lu q, lu sm, lu s, lu y, luciano f, luckhart s, lucocq jm,
ludovico p, lugea a, lukacs nw, lum jj, lund ah, luo h, luo j, luo s, luparello
c, lyons t, j, y, y, z, machado j, machado-santelli gm, macian f,
macintosh gc, mackeigan jp, macleod kf, macmicking jd, macmillan-crow la, madeo
f, madesh m, madrigal-matute j, maeda a, maeda t, maegawa g, maellaro e, maes h, 
magariños m, maiese k, maiti tk, maiuri l, maiuri mc, maki cg, malli r, malorni
w, maloyan a, mami-chouaib f, man n, mancias jd, mandelkow em, mandell ma,
manfredi aa, manié sn, manzoni c, mao k, mao z, mao zw, marambaud p, marconi am, 
marelja z, marfe g, margeta m, margittai e, mari m, mariani fv, marin c,
marinelli s, mariño g, markovic i, marquez r, martelli am, martens s, martin kr, 
martin sj, martin s, martin-acebes ma, martín-sanz p, martinand-mari c, martinet 
w, martinez j, martinez-lopez n, martinez-outschoorn u, martínez-velázquez m,
martinez-vicente m, martins wk, mashima h, mastrianni ja, matarese g, matarrese
p, mateo r, matoba s, matsumoto n, matsushita t, matsuura a, matsuzawa t, mattson
mp, matus s, maugeri n, mauvezin c, mayer a, maysinger d, mazzolini gd, mcbrayer 
mk, mccall k, mccormick c, mcinerney gm, mciver sc, mckenna s, mcmahon jj,
mcneish ia, mechta-grigoriou f, medema jp, medina dl, megyeri k, mehrpour m,
mehta jl, mei y, meier uc, meijer aj, meléndez a, melino g, melino s, de melo ej,
mena ma, meneghini md, menendez ja, menezes r, meng l, meng lh, meng s, menghini 
r, menko as, menna-barreto rf, menon mb, meraz-ríos ma, merla g, merlini l,
merlot am, meryk a, meschini s, meyer jn, mi mt, miao cy, micale l, michaeli s,
michiels c, migliaccio ar, mihailidou as, mijaljica d, mikoshiba k, milan e,
miller-fleming l, mills gb, mills ig, minakaki g, minassian ba, ming xf,
minibayeva f, minina ea, mintern jd, minucci s, miranda-vizuete a, mitchell ch,
miyamoto s, miyazawa k, mizushima n, mnich k, mograbi b, mohseni s, moita lf,
molinari m, molinari m, møller ab, mollereau b, mollinedo f, mongillo m, monick
mm, montagnaro s, montell c, moore dj, moore mn, mora-rodriguez r, moreira pi,
morel e, morelli mb, moreno s, morgan mj, moris a, moriyasu y, morrison jl,
morrison la, morselli e, moscat j, moseley pl, mostowy s, motori e, mottet d,
mottram jc, moussa ce, mpakou ve, mukhtar h, mulcahy levy jm, muller s,
muñoz-moreno r, muñoz-pinedo c, münz c, murphy me, murray jt, murthy a, mysorekar
iu, nabi ir, nabissi m, nader ga, nagahara y, nagai y, nagata k, nagelkerke a,
nagy p, naidu sr, nair s, nakano h, nakatogawa h, nanjundan m, napolitano g,
naqvi ni, nardacci r, narendra dp, narita m, nascimbeni ac, natarajan r,
navegantes lc, nawrocki st, nazarko ty, nazarko vy, neill t, neri lm, netea mg,
netea-maier rt, neves bm, ney pa, nezis ip, nguyen ht, nguyen hp, nicot as,
nilsen h, nilsson p, nishimura m, nishino i, niso-santano m, niu h, nixon ra,
njar vc, noda t, noegel aa, nolte em, norberg e, norga kk, noureini sk, notomi s,
notterpek l, nowikovsky k, nukina n, nürnberger t, o'donnell vb, o'donovan t,
o'dwyer pj, oehme i, oeste cl, ogawa m, ogretmen b, ogura y, oh yj, ohmuraya m,
ohshima t, ojha r, okamoto k, okazaki t, oliver fj, ollinger k, olsson s, orban
dp, ordonez p, orhon i, orosz l, o'rourke ej, orozco h, ortega al, ortona e,
osellame ld, oshima j, oshima s, osiewacz hd, otomo t, otsu k, ou jh, outeiro tf,
ouyang dy, ouyang h, overholtzer m, ozbun ma, ozdinler ph, ozpolat b, pacelli c, 
paganetti p, page g, pages g, pagnini u, pajak b, pak sc, pakos-zebrucka k,
pakpour n, palková z, palladino f, pallauf k, pallet n, palmieri m, paludan sr,
palumbo c, palumbo s, pampliega o, pan h, pan w, panaretakis t, pandey a,
pantazopoulou a, papackova z, papademetrio dl, papassideri i, papini a, parajuli 
n, pardo j, parekh vv, parenti g, park ji, park j, park ok, parker r, parlato r, 
parys jb, parzych kr, pasquet jm, pasquier b, pasumarthi kb, patschan d,
patterson c, pattingre s, pattison s, pause a, pavenstädt h, pavone f, pedrozo z,
peña fj, peñalva ma, pende m, peng j, penna f, penninger jm, pensalfini a, pepe
s, pereira gj, pereira pc, pérez-de la cruz v, pérez-pérez me, pérez-rodríguez d,
pérez-sala d, perier c, perl a, perlmutter dh, perrotta i, pervaiz s, pesonen m, 
pessin je, peters gj, petersen m, petrache i, petrof bj, petrovski g, phang jm,
piacentini m, pierdominici m, pierre p, pierrefite-carle v, pietrocola f,
pimentel-muiños fx, pinar m, pineda b, pinkas-kramarski r, pinti m, pinton p,
piperdi b, piret jm, platanias lc, platta hw, plowey ed, pöggeler s, poirot m,
polčic p, poletti a, poon ah, popelka h, popova b, poprawa i, poulose sm, poulton
j, powers sk, powers t, pozuelo-rubio m, prak k, prange r, prescott m, priault m,
prince s, proia rl, proikas-cezanne t, prokisch h, promponas vj, przyklenk k,
puertollano r, pugazhenthi s, puglielli l, pujol a, puyal j, pyeon d, qi x, qian 
wb, qin zh, qiu y, qu z, quadrilatero j, quinn f, raben n, rabinowich h, radogna 
f, ragusa mj, rahmani m, raina k, ramanadham s, ramesh r, rami a, randall-demllo 
s, randow f, rao h, rao va, rasmussen bb, rasse tm, ratovitski ea, rautou pe, ray
sk, razani b, reed bh, reggiori f, rehm m, reichert as, rein t, reiner dj, reits 
e, ren j, ren x, renna m, reusch je, revuelta jl, reyes l, rezaie ar, richards
ri, richardson dr, richetta c, riehle ma, rihn bh, rikihisa y, riley be, rimbach 
g, rippo mr, ritis k, rizzi f, rizzo e, roach pj, robbins j, roberge m, roca g,
roccheri mc, rocha s, rodrigues cm, rodríguez ci, de cordoba sr, rodriguez-muela 
n, roelofs j, rogov vv, rohn tt, rohrer b, romanelli d, romani l, romano ps,
roncero mi, rosa jl, rosello a, rosen kv, rosenstiel p, rost-roszkowska m, roth
ka, roué g, rouis m, rouschop km, ruan dt, ruano d, rubinsztein dc, rucker eb
3rd, rudich a, rudolf e, rudolf r, ruegg ma, ruiz-roldan c, ruparelia aa, rusmini
p, russ dw, russo gl, russo g, russo r, rusten te, ryabovol v, ryan km, ryter sw,
sabatini dm, sacher m, sachse c, sack mn, sadoshima j, saftig p, sagi-eisenberg
r, sahni s, saikumar p, saito t, saitoh t, sakakura k, sakoh-nakatogawa m,
sakuraba y, salazar-roa m, salomoni p, saluja ak, salvaterra pm, salvioli r,
samali a, sanchez am, sánchez-alcázar ja, sanchez-prieto r, sandri m, sanjuan ma,
santaguida s, santambrogio l, santoni g, dos santos cn, saran s, sardiello m,
sargent g, sarkar p, sarkar s, sarrias mr, sarwal mm, sasakawa c, sasaki m, sass 
m, sato k, sato m, satriano j, savaraj n, saveljeva s, schaefer l, schaible ue,
scharl m, schatzl hm, schekman r, scheper w, schiavi a, schipper hm, schmeisser
h, schmidt j, schmitz i, schneider be, schneider em, schneider jl, schon ea,
schönenberger mj, schönthal ah, schorderet df, schröder b, schuck s, schulze rj, 
schwarten m, schwarz tl, sciarretta s, scotto k, scovassi ai, screaton ra, screen
m, seca h, sedej s, segatori l, segev n, seglen po, seguí-simarro jm,
segura-aguilar j, seki e, sell c, seiliez i, semenkovich cf, semenza gl, sen u,
serra al, serrano-puebla a, sesaki h, setoguchi t, settembre c, shacka jj,
shajahan-haq an, shapiro im, sharma s, h, shen ck, shen cc, shen hm, shen s, 
shen w, sheng r, sheng x, sheng zh, shepherd tg, shi j, shi q, shi q, shi y,
shibutani s, shibuya k, shidoji y, shieh jj, shih cm, shimada y, shimizu s, shin 
dw, shinohara ml, shintani m, shintani t, shioi t, shirabe k, shiri-sverdlov r,
shirihai o, shore gc, shu cw, shukla d, sibirny aa, sica v, sigurdson cj,
sigurdsson em, sijwali ps, sikorska b, silveira wa, silvente-poirot s, silverman 
ga, simak j, simmet t, simon ak, simon hu, simone c, simons m, simonsen a, singh 
r, singh sv, singh sk, sinha d, sinha s, sinicrope fa, sirko a, sirohi k, sishi
bj, sittler a, siu pm, sivridis e, skwarska a, slack r, slaninová i, slavov n,
smaili ss, smalley ks, smith dr, soenen sj, soleimanpour sa, solhaug a,
somasundaram k, son jh, sonawane a, song c, song f, song hk, song jx, song w, soo
ky, sood ak, soong tw, soontornniyomkij v, sorice m, sotgia f, soto-pantoja dr,
sotthibundhu a, sousa mj, spaink hp, span pn, spang a, sparks jd, speck pg,
spector sa, spies cd, springer w, clair ds, stacchiotti a, staels b, stang mt,
starczynowski dt, starokadomskyy p, steegborn c, steele jw, stefanis l, steffan
j, stellrecht cm, stenmark h, stepkowski tm, stern st, stevens c, stockwell br,
stoka v, storchova z, stork b, stratoulias v, stravopodis dj, strnad p,
strohecker am, ström al, stromhaug p, stulik j, su yx, su z, subauste cs,
subramaniam s, sue cm, suh sw, sui x, sukseree s, sulzer d, sun fl, sun j, sun j,
sun sy, sun y, sun y, sun y, sundaramoorthy v, sung j, suzuki h, suzuki k, suzuki
n, suzuki t, suzuki yj, swanson ms, swanton c, swärd k, swarup g, sweeney st,
sylvester pw, szatmari z, szegezdi e, szlosarek pw, taegtmeyer h, tafani m,
taillebourg e, tait sw, takacs-vellai k, takahashi y, takáts s, takemura g,
takigawa n, talbot nj, tamagno e, tamburini j, tan cp, tan l, tan ml, tan m, tan 
yj, tanaka k, tanaka m, tang d, tang d, tang g, tanida i, tanji k, tannous ba,
tapia ja, tasset-cuevas i, tatar m, tavassoly i, tavernarakis n, taylor a, taylor
gs, taylor ga, taylor jp, taylor mj, tchetina ev, tee ar, teixeira-clerc f,
telang s, tencomnao t, teng bb, teng rj, terro f, tettamanti g, theiss al, theron
ae, thomas kj, thomé mp, thomes pg, thorburn a, thorner j, thum t, thumm m,
thurston tl, tian l, till a, ting jp, titorenko vi, toker l, toldo s, tooze sa,
topisirovic i, torgersen ml, torosantucci l, torriglia a, torrisi mr, tournier c,
towns r, trajkovic v, travassos lh, triola g, tripathi dn, trisciuoglio d,
troncoso r, trougakos ip, truttmann ac, tsai kj, tschan mp, tseng yh, tsukuba t, 
tsung a, tsvetkov as, tu s, tuan hy, tucci m, tumbarello da, turk b, turk v,
turner rf, tveita aa, tyagi sc, ubukata m, uchiyama y, udelnow a, ueno t, umekawa
m, umemiya-shirafuji r, underwood br, ungermann c, ureshino rp, ushioda r,
uversky vn, uzcátegui nl, vaccari t, vaccaro mi, váchová l,
vakifahmetoglu-norberg h, valdor r, valente em, vallette f, valverde am, van den 
berghe g, van den bosch l, van den brink gr, van der goot fg, van der klei ij,
van der laan lj, van doorn wg, van egmond m, van golen kl, van kaer l, van
lookeren campagne m, vandenabeele p, vandenberghe w, vanhorebeek i, varela-nieto 
i, vasconcelos mh, vasko r, vavvas dg, vega-naredo i, velasco g, velentzas ad,
velentzas pd, vellai t, vellenga e, vendelbo mh, venkatachalam k, ventura n,
ventura s, veras ps, verdier m, vertessy bg, viale a, vidal m, vieira hl,
vierstra rd, vigneswaran n, vij n, vila m, villar m, villar vh, villarroya j,
vindis c, viola g, viscomi mt, vitale g, vogl dt, voitsekhovskaja ov, von haefen 
c, von schwarzenberg k, voth de, vouret-craviari v, vuori k, vyas jm, waeber c,
walker cl, walker mj, walter j, wan l, wan x, wang b, wang c, wang cy, wang c,
wang c, wang c, wang d, wang f, wang f, wang g, wang hj, wang h, wang hg, wang h,
wang hd, wang j, wang j, wang m, wang mq, wang py, wang p, wang rc, wang s, wang 
tf, wang x, wang xj, wang xw, wang x, wang x, wang y, wang y, wang y, wang yj,
wang y, wang y, wang yt, wang y, wang zn, wappner p, ward c, ward dm, warnes g,
watada h, watanabe y, watase k, weaver te, weekes cd, wei j, weide t, weihl cc,
weindl g, weis sn, wen l, wen x, wen y, westermann b, weyand cm, white ar, white 
e, whitton jl, whitworth aj, wiels j, wild f, wildenberg me, wileman t, wilkinson
ds, wilkinson s, willbold d, williams c, williams k, williamson pr, winklhofer
kf, witkin ss, wohlgemuth se, wollert t, wolvetang ej, wong e, wong gw, wong rw, 
wong vk, woodcock ea, wright kl, wu c, wu d, wu gs, wu j, wu j, wu m, wu m, wu s,
wu wk, wu y, wu z, xavier cp, xavier rj, xia gx, xia t, xia w, xia y, xiao h,
xiao j, xiao s, xiao w, xie cm, xie z, xie z, xilouri m, xiong y, xu c, xu c, xu 
f, xu h, xu h, xu j, xu j, xu j, xu l, xu x, xu y, xu y, xu zx, xu z, xue y,
yamada t, yamamoto a, yamanaka k, yamashina s, yamashiro s, yan b, yan b, yan x, 
yan z, yanagi y, yang ds, yang jm, yang l, yang m, yang pm, yang p, yang q, yang 
w, yang wy, yang x, yang y, yang y, yang z, yang z, yao mc, yao pj, yao x, yao z,
yao z, yasui ls, ye m, yedvobnick b, yeganeh b, yeh es, yeyati pl, yi f, yi l,
yin xm, yip ck, yoo ym, yoo yh, yoon sy, yoshida k, yoshimori t, young kh, yu h, 
yu jj, yu jt, yu j, yu l, yu wh, yu xf, yu z, yuan j, yuan zm, yue by, yue j, yue
z, zacks dn, zacksenhaus e, zaffaroni n, zaglia t, zakeri z, zecchini v, zeng j, 
zeng m, zeng q, zervos as, zhang dd, zhang f, zhang g, zhang gc, zhang h, zhang
h, zhang h, zhang h, zhang j, zhang j, zhang j, zhang j, zhang jp, zhang l, zhang
l, zhang l, zhang l, zhang my, zhang x, zhang xd, zhang y, zhang y, zhang y,
zhang y, zhang y, zhao m, zhao wl, zhao x, zhao yg, zhao y, zhao y, zhao yx, zhao
z, zhao zj, zheng d, zheng xl, zheng x, zhivotovsky b, zhong q, zhou gz, zhou g, 
zhou h, zhou sf, zhou xj, zhu h, zhu h, zhu wg, zhu w, zhu xf, zhu y, zhuang sm, 
zhuang x, ziparo e, zois ce, zoladek t, zong wx, zorzano a, zughaier sm.

erratum in
    autophagy. 2016;12(2):443. selliez, iban [corrected seiliez, iban].

doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1100356 
pmcid: pmc4835977
pmid: 26799652  [indexed medline]

