
1. J Virol. 1999 Jul;73(7):5777-86.

Analysis of the effect of natural sequence variation in Tat and in cyclin T on
the formation and RNA binding properties of Tat-cyclin T complexes.

Bieniasz PD(1), Grdina TA, Bogerd HP, Cullen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Genetics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The biological activity of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat
(Tat1) transcriptional activator requires the recruitment of a Tat1-CyclinT1
(CycT1) complex to the TAR RNA target encoded within the viral long terminal
repeat (LTR). While other primate immunodeficiency viruses, such as HIV-2 and
mandrill simian immunodeficiency virus (SIVmnd), also encode Tat proteins that
activate transcription via RNA targets, these proteins differ significantly, both
from each other and from Tat1, in terms of their ability to activate
transcription directed by LTR promoter elements found in different HIV and SIV
isolates. Here, we show that CycT1 also serves as an essential cofactor for HIV-2
Tat (Tat2) and SIVmnd Tat (Tat-M) function. Moreover, the CycT1 complex formed by
each Tat protein displays a distinct RNA target specificity that accurately
predicts the level of activation observed with a particular LTR. While Tat2 and
Tat-M share the ability of Tat1 to bind to CycT1, they differ from Tat1 in that
they are also able to bind to the related but distinct CycT2. However, the
resultant Tat-CycT2 complexes fail to bind TAR and are therefore abortive.
Surprisingly, mutation of a single residue in CycT2 (asparagine 260 to cysteine) 
rescues the ability of CycT2 to bind Tat1 and also activates not only TAR binding
by all three Tat-CycT2 complexes but also Tat function. Therefore, the RNA target
specificity of different Tat-CycT1 complexes is modulated by natural sequence
variation in both the viral Tat transcriptional activator and in the host cell
CycT molecule recruited by Tat. Further, the RNA target specificity of the
resultant Tat-CycT1 complex accurately predicts the ability of that complex to
activate transcription from a given LTR promoter element.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.7.5777-5786.1999 
PMCID: PMC112638
PMID: 10364329  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

