
1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 19;274(47):33800-6.

Cell surface CD4 inhibits HIV-1 particle release by interfering with Vpu
activity.

Bour S(1), Perrin C, Strebel K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, NIAID, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0460, USA. sbour@nih.gov

One of the hallmarks of human immunodeficiency virus type I (HIV-1) infection is 
the rapid removal of the viral receptor CD4 from the cell surface. This
remarkably efficient receptor interference requires the activity of three
separate viral proteins: Env, Vpu, and Nef. We have investigated whether this
unusually tight interference on cell surface CD4 expression had a more essential 
function during the viral life cycle than simply preventing superinfection. We
now report that the removal of cell surface CD4 is required for optimal virus
production by HIV-1. Indeed, maintenance of CD4 surface expression in infected
cells lead to a 3-5-fold decrease in viral particle production. This effect was
not due to the formation of intracellular complexes between CD4 and the gp160
viral envelope precursor but instead required the presence of CD4 at the cell
surface and was specifically mediated by CD4 but not closely related plasma
membrane receptors. The finding that CD4 had no significant effect on particle
release by a Vpu-deficient variant indicates that CD4 acts by inhibiting the
particle release-promoting activity of Vpu. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments
further showed that CD4 and Vpu physically interact at the cell surface,
suggesting that CD4 might inhibit Vpu activity by disrupting its oligomeric
structure.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.47.33800 
PMID: 10559275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

