
1. Virology. 2000 Mar 1;268(1):178-91.

The Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 2A PY motif recruits WW
domain-containing ubiquitin-protein ligases.

Ikeda M(1), Ikeda A, Longan LC, Longnecker R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois, 60611, USA.

Latent membrane protein 2A (LMP2A) is expressed in latent Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) infection. LMP2A functions to downregulate B-cell signal transduction and
viral reactivation from latency in EBV-immortalized B cells in vitro, and acts to
provide B cells with both a survival and developmental signal in vivo.
Identification of proteins associated with LMP2A is important for elucidation of 
the mechanism that LMP2A employs to regulate B-cell signal transduction and EBV
latency. LMP2A is constitutively tyrosine phosphorylated and is associated with
protein tyrosine kinases such as Lyn and Syk when specific LMP2A tyrosines are
phosphorylated. The amino-terminal domain of LMP2A includes multiple proline-rich
regions, which may provide binding sites for proteins containing SH3 or WW
domains. In this study, we demonstrate that four cellular proteins bind
specifically to two PPPPY (PY) motifs present within the LMP2A amino-terminal
domain. Protein microsequence analysis determined that three of these proteins
were AIP4, WWP2/AIP2, and Nedd4. All of these proteins are members of the
Nedd4-like ubiquitin-protein ligases family and have conserved domains including 
the C2, WW, and ubiquitin-protein ligase domain. The mutation of both PY motifs
completely abolished binding activity of these proteins to LMP2A and the
interaction of AIP4 and WWP2 with LMP2A was confirmed in cell lines expressing
LMP2A, WWP2, and AIP4. Furthermore, a reduction in the level of Lyn and the rapid
turnover of LMP2A and Lyn were observed in LMP2A-expressing cells. These findings
suggest that LMP2A recruits Nedd4-like ubiquitin-protein ligases and B-cell
signal transduction molecules, resulting in the degradation of LMP2A and Lyn by a
ubiquitin-dependent mechanism. This provides a new means by which LMP2A may
modulate B-cell signal transduction.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.0166 
PMID: 10683340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

