
1. Virology. 2000 Mar 1;268(1):147-58.

Cellular expression of alphaherpesvirus gD interferes with entry of homologous
and heterologous alphaherpesviruses by blocking access to a shared gD receptor.

Geraghty RJ(1), Jogger CR, Spear PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois, 60611, USA.

Several human and animal alphaherpesviruses can enter cells via human herpesvirus
entry mediator C (HveC), a receptor for viral glycoprotein D (gD). In previous
studies with cells expressing unknown entry mediators, cellular expression of
alphaherpesvirus gD was shown to inhibit entry of the homologous virus and
sometimes also of heterologous alphaherpesviruses. To investigate the mechanism
of gD-mediated interference and the basis for cross-interference among
alphaherpesviruses, HveC was expressed in cells as the sole entry mediator, in
the presence or absence of one of the gDs encoded by herpes simplex virus type 1,
pseudorabies virus, or bovine herpesvirus type 1. Cells expressing HveC alone
were highly susceptible to entry of all three viruses, whereas cells coexpressing
HveC and any one of the gDs were at least partially resistant to infection by
each virus. Coexpression of gD with HveC did not cause reduced levels of
cell-surface HveC but the HveC had reduced ability to bind to exogenous gD.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed that HveC was complexed with gD in
lysates of cells expressing both. Thus, cellular expression of gD can interfere
with alphaherpesvirus entry by blocking ligand-binding sites of the gD
receptor(s) used for entry and cross-interference can occur because different
forms of alphaherpesvirus gD can compete for shared entry receptors.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.0157 
PMID: 10683337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

