
1. J Gen Virol. 2000 Apr;81(Pt 4):1057-66.

The activity of the Epstein-Barr virus BamHI W promoter in B cells is dependent
on the binding of CREB/ATF factors.

Kirby H(1), Rickinson A, Bell A.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Institute for Cancer Studies, The University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham B15 2TA, UK.

The programme of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) gene expression that leads to
virus-induced growth transformation of resting B lymphocytes is initiated through
activation of the BamHI W promoter, Wp. The factors regulating Wp, and the basis 
of its preferential activity in B cells, remain poorly understood. Previous work 
has identified a B cell-specific enhancer region which is critical for Wp
function and which contains three binding sites for cellular factors. Here we
focus on one of these sites and show, using bandshift assays, that it interacts
with three members of the CREB/ATF family of cell transcription factors, CREB1,
ATF1 and ATFa. A mutation which abrogates the binding of these factors reduces Wp
reporter activity specifically in B cell lines, whereas a mutation which converts
the site to a consensus CREB-binding sequence maintains wild-type promoter
function. Furthermore Wp activity in B cell, but not in non-B cell, lines could
be inhibited by cotransfection of expression plasmids expressing dominant
negative forms of CREB1 and ATF1. Increasing the basal activity of CREB/ATF
proteins in cells by treatment with protein kinase A or protein kinase C agonists
led to small increases in Wp activity in B cell lines, but did not restore
promoter activity in non-B cell lines up to B cell levels. We conclude that
CREB/ATF factors are important activators of Wp in a B cell environment but
require additional B cell-specific factors in order to mediate their effects.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-81-4-1057 
PMID: 10725433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

