
1. J Virol. 2000 Jul;74(13):6096-104.

Expression of human herpesvirus 6B rep within infected cells and binding of its
gene product to the TATA-binding protein in vitro and in vivo.

Mori Y(1), Dhepakson P, Shimamoto T, Ueda K, Gomi Y, Tani H, Matsuura Y,
Yamanishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Osaka University Medical School, Osaka University,
Suita, Japan.

We have characterized the human herpesvirus 6B (HHV-6B) rep gene, which is a
homologue of the adeno-associated virus type 2 rep and is unique in the
herpesvirus family. Three transcripts, 9.0, 5.0, and 2. 7 kb (the major
transcript), were detected by Northern blotting using an HHV-6B rep probe under
late conditions. We investigated the expression kinetics of the rep gene using
cycloheximide (CHX) and phosphonoformic acid (PFA), which are inhibitors of
protein synthesis and viral DNA synthesis, respectively. The 5.2-kb transcript
was mainly detected in the absence of protein biosynthesis upon infection, and
none of the 9.0-, 5.0-, and 2.7-kb transcripts detected under the late conditions
were detected in the presence of CHX and PFA. Sequences obtained from a cDNA
library showed that the 5.0- and 2.7-kb transcripts were spliced from two and
three exons, respectively, and the 2.7-kb transcript was more abundant.
Immunohistochemistry using an antibody raised against the HHV-6 rep gene product 
(REP) revealed that REP was mainly present in the nucleus of MT-4 cells within 24
h after infection with HHV-6B. Using pull-down assays, coimmunoprecipitation, and
a mammalian two hybrid system, we showed that HHV-6 REP binds to a transcription 
factor, human TATA-binding protein, through its N-terminal region.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.13.6096-6104.2000 
PMCID: PMC112108
PMID: 10846093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

