
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(15):5722-35.

Modulation of histone acetyltransferase activity through interaction of
epstein-barr nuclear antigen 3C with prothymosin alpha.

Cotter MA 2nd(1), Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Cellular and Molecular Biology
Program, University of Michigan Medical School, University of Michigan Medical
Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) is essential for
EBV-dependent immortalization of human primary B lymphocytes. Genetic analysis
indicated that amino acids 365 to 992 are important for EBV-mediated
immortalization of B lymphocytes. We demonstrate that this region of EBNA3C
critical for immortalization interacts with prothymosin alpha (ProTalpha), a
cellular protein previously identified to be important for cell division and
proliferation. This interaction maps to a region downstream of amino acid 365
known to be involved in transcription regulation and critical for EBV-mediated
transformation of primary B lymphocytes. Additionally, we show that EBNA3C also
interacts with p300, a cellular acetyltransferase. This interaction suggests a
possible role in regulation of histone acetylation and chromatin remodeling. An
increase in histone acetylation was observed in EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid
cell lines, which is consistent with increased cellular gene expression. These
cells express the entire repertoire of latent nuclear antigens, including EBNA3C.
Expression of EBNA3C in cells with increased acetyltransferase activity mediated 
by the EBV transactivator EBNA2 results in down-modulation of this activity in a 
dose-responsive manner. The interactions of EBNA3C with ProTalpha and p300
provide new evidence implicating this essential EBV protein EBNA3C in modulating 
the acetylation of cellular factors, including histones. Hence, EBNA3C plays a
critical role in balancing cellular transcriptional events by linking the
biological property of mediating inhibition of EBNA2 transcription activation and
the observed histone acetyltransferase activity, thereby orchestrating
immortalization of EBV-infected cells.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.20.15.5722-5735.2000 
PMCID: PMC86050
PMID: 10891508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

