
1. J Virol. 2000 Oct;74(20):9680-93.

Multi-PDZ domain protein MUPP1 is a cellular target for both adenovirus E4-ORF1
and high-risk papillomavirus type 18 E6 oncoproteins.

Lee SS(1), Glaunsinger B, Mantovani F, Banks L, Javier RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

A general theme that has emerged from studies of DNA tumor viruses is that
otherwise unrelated oncoproteins encoded by these viruses often target the same
important cellular factors. Major oncogenic determinants for human adenovirus
type 9 (Ad9) and high-risk human papillomaviruses (HPV) are the E4-ORF1 and E6
oncoproteins, respectively, and although otherwise unrelated, both of these viral
proteins possess a functional PDZ domain-binding motif that is essential for
their transforming activity and for binding to the PDZ domain-containing and
putative tumor suppressor protein DLG. We report here that the PDZ domain-binding
motifs of Ad9 E4-ORF1 and high-risk HPV-18 E6 also mediate binding to the widely 
expressed cellular factor MUPP1, a large multi-PDZ domain protein predicted to
function as an adapter in signal transduction. With regard to the consequences of
these interactions in cells, we showed that Ad9 E4-ORF1 aberrantly sequesters
MUPP1 within the cytoplasm of cells whereas HPV-18 E6 targets this cellular
protein for degradation. These effects were specific because mutant viral
proteins unable to bind MUPP1 lack these activities. From these results, we
propose that the multi-PDZ domain protein MUPP1 is involved in negatively
regulating cellular proliferation and that the transforming activities of two
different viral oncoproteins depend, in part, on their ability to inactivate this
cellular factor.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.20.9680-9693.2000 
PMCID: PMC112400
PMID: 11000240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

