
1. J Virol. 2000 Nov;74(21):10081-95.

The E1E4 protein of human papillomavirus type 16 associates with a putative RNA
helicase through sequences in its C terminus.

Doorbar J(1), Elston RC, Napthine S, Raj K, Medcalf E, Jackson D, Coleman N,
Griffin HM, Masterson P, Stacey S, Mengistu Y, Dunlop J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill,
London, United Kingdom. jdoorba@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) infects cervical epithelium and is
associated with the majority of cervical cancers. The E1E4 protein of HPV16 but
not those of HPV1 or HPV6 was found to associate with a novel member of the DEAD 
box protein family of RNA helicases through sequences in its C terminus. This
protein, termed E4-DBP (E4-DEAD box protein), has a molecular weight of 66,000
(66K) and can shuttle between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. It binds to RNA in
vitro, including the major HPV16 late transcript (E1E4. L1), and has an
RNA-independent ATPase activity which can be partially inhibited by E1E4. E4-DBP 
was detectable in the cytoplasm of cells expressing HPV16 E1E4 (in vivo and in
vitro) and could be immunoprecipitated as an E1E4 complex from cervical
epithelial cell lines. In cell lines lacking cytoplasmic intermediate filaments, 
loss of the leucine cluster-cytoplasmic anchor region of HPV16 E1wedgeE4 resulted
in both proteins colocalizing exclusively to the nucleoli. Two additional HPV16
E1E4-binding proteins, of 80K and 50K, were identified in pull-down experiments
but were not recognized by antibodies to E4-DBP or the conserved DEAD box motif. 
Sequence analysis of E4-DBP revealed homology in its E4-binding region with three
Escherichia coli DEAD box proteins involved in the regulation of mRNA stability
and degradation (RhlB, SrmB, and DeaD) and with the Rrp3 protein of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, which is involved in ribosome biogenesis. The synthesis of HPV16 coat
proteins occurs after E1E4 expression and genome amplification and is regulated
at the level of mRNA stability and translation. Identification of E4-DBP as an
HPV16 E1E4-associated protein indicates a possible role for E1E4 in virus
synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.21.10081-10095.2000 
PMCID: PMC102047
PMID: 11024137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

