
1. Virology. 2000 Oct 10;276(1):127-37.

The HCV core protein acts as a positive regulator of fas-mediated apoptosis in a 
human lymphoblastoid T cell line.

Hahn CS(1), Cho YG, Kang BS, Lester IM, Hahn YS.

Author information: 
(1)Beirne Carter Center for Immunology Research, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major human pathogen causing mild to severe liver
disease worldwide and is remarkably efficient at establishing persistent
infections. Previously, we have shown that the core protein has an
immunomodulatory function including the suppression of T lymphocyte responses to 
viral infection. To investigate the underlying mechanism for the role of core
protein in immune modulation, we examined the effect of core on the sensitivity
of the human T cell line, Jurkat, to Fas-mediated apoptosis. The transient and
stable expression of core protein in Jurkat cells increased the sensitivity of
cells to Fas-mediated apoptosis when compared to control cells expressing vector 
DNA alone. In addition, we demonstrated that the core protein binds to the
cytoplasmic domain of Fas which may enhance the downstream signaling event of
Fas-mediated apoptosis. The expression of core protein did not alter the cell
surface expression of Fas, indicating that the increased sensitivity of
core-expressing cells to Fas ligand was not due to upregulation of Fas.
Furthermore, we observed the augmentation of caspase-3 activity in
core-expressing cells. These results suggest that the core protein may promote
the apoptosis of immune cells during HCV infection via the Fas signaling pathway,
thus facilitating HCV persistence.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2000.0541 
PMID: 11022001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

