
1. J Mol Biol. 2000 Dec 8;304(4):529-40.

Phage display screening reveals an association between germline-specific
transcription factor Oct-4 and multiple cellular proteins.

Butteroni C(1), De Felici M, Sch√∂ler HR, Pesce M.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Programme, European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg, D-69126, Germany.

Oct-4 is a transcription factor that is specifically expressed in mouse embryonic
stem cells and in cell lines derived thereof. In these cells, Oct-4 activates
transcription from remote binding sites due to as of yet unknown co-activators.
Expression of Oct-4 in differentiated cells is not sufficient to activate
transcription from a distance, rather it requires the co-expression of
co-activators such as the adenoviral oncoprotein E1A. In this paper, we used
phage display to identify Oct-4-interacting proteins. We first analyzed the
interaction between Oct-4 and E1A in order to optimize the biochemical conditions
that enable Oct-4-specific interactions with other interacting proteins. A
panning approach was used to enrich Oct-4 interacting phages from a pool of
excess unspecific phages. The biochemical conditions established in our
interaction assays were then used to screen a P19 EC cell cDNA expression library
in M13 filamentous phage. A number of phage clones displaying portions of unknown
and known transcription factors were obtained, from which the HMG-1 transcription
factor was identified. HMG-1, and the closely related factor HMG-2, interact with
Oct-4 when co-expressed in mammalian cells. In addition, HMG-1 was found to
cooperate with Oct-4 in P19 EC cells. These results provide the first evidence of
a non-viral factor that enhances Oct-4 distance-dependent transactivation in stem
cells.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4238 
PMID: 11099378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

