
1. J Virol. 2001 Feb;75(3):1348-58.

Hepatitis C virus 3'X region interacts with human ribosomal proteins.

Wood J(1), Frederickson RM, Fields S, Patel AH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Institute of Virology, Glasgow G11 5JR, United Kingdom.

To identify proteins that can bind the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of hepatitis 
C virus (HCV) we screened human cDNA libraries using the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
three-hybrid system. Screening with an RNA sequence derived from the 3'-terminal 
98 nucleotides (3'X region) of an infectious clone of HCV (H77c) yielded clones
of human ribosomal proteins L22, L3, S3, and mL3, a mitochondrial homologue of
L3. We performed preliminary characterization of the binding between the 3'X
region and these proteins by a three-hybrid mating assay using mutant 3'X
sequences. We have further characterized the interaction between 3'X and L22,
since this protein is known to be associated with two small Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-encoded RNA species (EBERs) which are abundantly produced in cells latently
infected with EBV. The EBERs, which have similar predicted secondary structure to
the HCV 3'X, assemble into ribonucleoprotein particles that include L22 and La
protein. To confirm that L22 binds HCV 3'X we performed in vitro binding assays
using recombinant L22 (expressed as a glutathione S-transferase [GST] fusion
protein) together with a 3'X riboprobe. The 3'X region binds to the GST-L22
fusion protein (but not to GST alone), and this interaction is subject to
competition with unlabeled 3'X RNA. To establish the functional role played by
L22 in internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-mediated translation of HCV sequences 
we performed translational analysis in HuH-7 cells using monocistronic and
bicistronic reporter constructs. The relative amount of core-chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter protein translated under the control of the HCV IRES
was stimulated in the presence of L22 and La when these proteins were supplied in
trans.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.3.1348-1358.2001 
PMCID: PMC114041
PMID: 11152508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

