
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1877-82. Epub 2001 Feb 6.

Herpes simplex virus 1 alpha regulatory protein ICP0 functionally interacts with 
cellular transcription factor BMAL1.

Kawaguchi Y(1), Tanaka M, Yokoymama A, Matsuda G, Kato K, Kagawa H, Hirai K,
Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virology, Division of Virology and Immunology, Medical
Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

The infected cell protein no. 0 (ICP0) of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a
promiscuous transactivator shown to enhance the expression of gene introduced
into cells by infection or transfection. At the molecular level, ICP0 is a 775-aa
ring finger protein localized initially in the nucleus and late in infection in
the cytoplasm and mediates the degradation of several proteins and stabilization 
of others. None of the known functions at the molecular level account for the
apparent activity of ICP0 as a transactivator. Here we report that ICP0
functionally interacts with cellular transcription factor BMAL1, a member of the 
basic helix-loop-helix PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) super family of transcriptional
regulators. Specifically, sequences mapped to the exon II of ICP0 interacted with
BMAL1 in the yeast two-hybrid system and in reciprocal pull-down experiments in
vitro. Moreover, the enhancement of transcription of a luciferase reporter
construct whose promoter contained multiple BMAL1-binding sites by ICP0 and BMAL1
was significantly greater than that observed by ICP0 or BMAL1 alone. Although the
level of BMAL1 present in nuclei of infected cells remained unchanged between 3
and 8 h after infection, the level of cytoplasmic BMAL1 was reduced at 8 h after 
infection. The reduction of cytoplasmic BMAL1 was significantly greater in cells 
infected with the ICP0-null mutant than in the wild-type virus-infected cells,
suggesting that ICP0 mediates partial stabilization of the protein. These results
indicate that ICP0 interacts physically and functionally with at least one
cellular transcription-regulatory factor.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.041592598 
PMCID: PMC29350
PMID: 11172044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

