
1. Nature. 2001 Apr 12;410(6830):834-8.

HIV-1 Nef inhibits ASK1-dependent death signalling providing a potential
mechanism for protecting the infected host cell.

Geleziunas R(1), Xu W, Takeda K, Ichijo H, Greene WC.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, PO Box 419100, San Francisco, 
California 94141-9100, USA.

In vivo infection of lymphatic tissues by the human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) leads to enhanced apoptosis, which prominently involves uninfected
bystander cells. Increased killing of such bystander cells is mediated in part
through Nef induction of Fas ligand (FasL) expression on the surface of the
virally infected T cells. The subsequent interaction of FasL with Fas (CD95)
displayed on neighbouring cells, including HIV-1-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes, may lead to bystander cell killing and thus forms an important
mechanism of immune evasion. As HIV-1 also enhances Fas expression on virally
infected cells, it is unclear how these hosts avoid rapid cell-autonomous
apoptosis mediated through cis ligation of Fas by FasL. Here we show that HIV-1
Nef associates with and inhibits apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1), a
serine/threonine kinase that forms a common and key signalling intermediate in
the Fas and tumour-necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) death-signalling pathways.
The interaction of Nef with ASK1 inhibits both Fas- and TNFalpha-mediated
apoptosis, as well as the activation of the downstream c-Jun amino-terminal
kinase. Our findings reveal a strategy by which HIV-1 Nef promotes the killing of
bystander cells through the induction of FasL, while simultaneously protecting
the HIV-1-infected host cell from these same pro-apoptotic signals through its
interference with ASK1 function.

DOI: 10.1038/35071111 
PMID: 11298454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

