
1. J Virol. 2001 Oct;75(20):9808-18.

Cellular COPII proteins are involved in production of the vesicles that form the 
poliovirus replication complex.

Rust RC(1), Landmann L, Gosert R, Tang BL, Hong W, Hauri HP, Egger D, Bienz K.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes for Medical Microbiology, Biocenter, University of Basel, CH-4000
Basel, Switzerland.

Poliovirus (PV) replicates its genome in association with membranous vesicles in 
the cytoplasm of infected cells. To elucidate the origin and mode of formation of
PV vesicles, immunofluorescence labeling with antibodies against the viral
vesicle marker proteins 2B and 2BC, as well as cellular markers of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), anterograde transport vesicles, and the Golgi
complex, was performed in BT7-H cells. Optical sections obtained by confocal
laser scanning microscopy were subjected to a deconvolution process to enhance
resolution and signal-to-noise ratio and to allow for a three-dimensional
representation of labeled membrane structures. The mode of formation of the PV
vesicles was, on morphological grounds, similar to the formation of anterograde
membrane traffic vesicles in uninfected cells. ER-resident membrane markers were 
excluded from both types of vesicles, and the COPII components Sec13 and Sec31
were both found to be colocalized on the vesicular surface, indicating the
presence of a functional COPII coat. PV vesicle formation during early time
points of infection did not involve the Golgi complex. The expression of PV
protein 2BC or the entire P2 and P3 genomic region led to the production of
vesicles carrying a COPII coat and showing the same mode of formation as vesicles
produced after PV infection. These results indicate that PV vesicles are formed
at the ER by the cellular COPII budding mechanism and thus are homologous to the 
vesicles of the anterograde membrane transport pathway.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.20.9808-9818.2001 
PMCID: PMC114553
PMID: 11559814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

