
1. J Virol. 2002 Feb;76(3):1400-14.

Oncoviral bovine leukemia virus G4 and human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 p13(II)
accessory proteins interact with farnesyl pyrophosphate synthetase.

Lef√®bvre L(1), Vanderplasschen A, Ciminale V, Heremans H, Dangoisse O, Jauniaux
JC, Toussaint JF, Zelnik V, Burny A, Kettmann R, Willems L.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agronomy, Gembloux, Belgium.

G4 and p13(II) are accessory proteins encoded by the X region of bovine leukemia 
virus and human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1), respectively. Disruption
of the G4 and p13(II) open reading frames interferes with viral spread in animal 
model systems, indicating that the corresponding proteins play a key role in
viral replication. In addition, G4 is oncogenic in primary cell cultures and is
absolutely required for efficient onset of leukemogenesis in sheep. To gain
insight into the function of these proteins, we utilized the yeast two-hybrid
system to identify protein partners of G4. Results revealed that G4 interacts
with farnesyl pyrophosphate synthetase (FPPS), a protein involved in the
mevalonate/squalene pathway and in synthesis of FPP, a substrate required for
prenylation of Ras. The specificity of the interaction was verified by
glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down assays and by coimmunoprecipitation
experiments. Furthermore, confocal microscopy showed that the subcellular
localization of G4 was profoundly affected by FPPS. The G4 protein itself was not
prenylated, at least in rabbit reticulocyte lysate-based assays. The domain of G4
required for binding to FPPS was restricted to an amphipathic alpha-helix rich in
arginine residues. Subtle mutation of this alpha-helix abrogated G4 oncogenic
potential in vitro, providing a biological relevance for FPPS-G4 complex
formation in cells. Finally, HTLV-1 p13(II) was also found to specifically
interact with FPPS (in yeast as well as in GST pull-down assays) and to
colocalize with G4 in mitochondria, suggesting a functional analogy between these
oncoviral accessory proteins. Identification of FPPS as a molecular partner for
p13(II) and G4 accessory proteins opens new prospects for treatment of
retrovirus-induced leukemia.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.3.1400-1414.2002 
PMCID: PMC135811
PMID: 11773414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

