
1. J Virol. 2002 Mar;76(5):2113-22.

Interaction of translation initiation factor eIF4B with the poliovirus internal
ribosome entry site.

Ochs K(1), Saleh L, Bassili G, Sonntag VH, Zeller A, Niepmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Friedrichstrasse 24, 35392
Giessen, Germany.

Poliovirus translation is initiated at the internal ribosome entry site (IRES).
Most likely involving the action of standard initiation factors, this highly
structured cis element in the 5" noncoding region of the viral RNA guides the
ribosome to an internal silent AUG. The actual start codon for viral protein
synthesis further downstream is then reached by ribosomal scanning. In this study
we show that two of the secondary structure elements of the poliovirus IRES,
domain V and, to a minor extent, domain VI, are the determinants for binding of
the eukaryotic initiation factor eIF4B. Several mutations in domain V which are
known to greatly affect poliovirus growth also seriously impair the binding of
eIF4B. The interaction of eIF4B with the IRES is not dependent on the presence of
the polypyrimidine tract-binding protein, which also binds to the poliovirus
IRES. In contrast to its weak interaction with cellular mRNAs, eIF4B remains
tightly associated with the poliovirus IRES during the formation of complete 80S 
ribosomes. Binding of eIF4B to the IRES is energy dependent, and binding of the
small ribosomal subunit to the IRES requires the previous energy-dependent
association of initiation factors with the IRES. These results indicate that the 
interaction of eIF4B with the 3" region of the poliovirus IRES may be directly
involved in translation initiation.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.5.2113-2122.2002 
PMCID: PMC135939
PMID: 11836388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

