
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23854-63. Epub 2002 Apr 16.

HIV-1 Tat protein-mediated transactivation of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat
promoter is potentiated by a novel nuclear Tat-interacting protein of 110 kDa,
Tip110.

Liu Y(1), Li J, Kim BO, Pace BS, He JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gene expression and replication is
highly dependent on and modulated by interactions between viral and host cellular
factors. Tat protein, encoded by one of the HIV-1 regulatory genes, tat, is
essential for HIV-1 gene expression. A number of host cellular factors have been 
shown to interact with Tat in this process. During our attempts to determine the 
molecular mechanisms of Tat interaction with brain cells, we isolated a cDNA
clone that encodes a novel Tat-interacting protein of 110 kDa or Tip110 from a
human fetal brain cDNA library. GenBank BLAST search revealed that Tip110 was
almost identical to a previously cloned KIAA0156 gene with unknown functions. In 
vivo binding of Tip110 with Tat was confirmed by immunoprecipitation and Western 
blotting, in combination with mutagenesis. The yeast three-hybrid RNA-protein
interaction assay indicated no direct interaction of Tip110 with Tat
transactivating response element RNA. Nevertheless, Tip110 strongly synergized
with Tat on Tat-mediated chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene
expression and HIV-1 virus production, whereas down-modulation of constitutive
Tip110 expression inhibited HIV-1 virus production. Northern blot analysis showed
that Tip110 mRNA was expressed in a variety of human tissues and cells. Moreover,
digital fluorescence microscopic imaging revealed that Tip110 was expressed
exclusively in the nucleus, and within a nuclear speckle structure that has
recently been described for human cyclin T and CDK9, two critical components for 
Tat transactivation function on HIV-1 long terminal repeat promoter. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that Tip110 regulates Tat transactivation
activity through direct interaction, and suggest that Tip110 is an important
cellular factor for HIV-1 gene expression and viral replication.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M200773200 
PMID: 11959860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

