
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):36399-407. Epub 2002 Jun 24.

The interdomain region of dengue NS5 protein that binds to the viral helicase NS3
contains independently functional importin beta 1 and importin
alpha/beta-recognized nuclear localization signals.

Brooks AJ(1), Johansson M, John AV, Xu Y, Jans DA, Vasudevan SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, James Cook University,
Queensland 4811, Australia.

Dengue virus NS5 protein is a multifunctional RNA-dependent RNA polymerase that
is essential for virus replication. We have shown previously that the 37- amino
acid interdomain spacer sequence (residues (369)X(2)KKX(14)KKKX(11)RKX(3)405) of 
Dengue2 NS5 contains a functional nuclear localization signal (NLS). In this
study, beta-galactosidase fusion proteins carrying point mutations of the
positively charged residues or truncations of the interdomain linker region
(residues 369-389 or residues 386-405) were analyzed for nuclear import and
importin binding activities to show that the N-terminal part of the linker region
(residues 369-389, a/bNLS) is critical for nuclear localization and is recognized
with high affinity by the conventional NLS-binding importin alpha/beta
heterodimeric nuclear import receptor. We also show that the importin
beta-binding site (residues 320-368, bNLS) adjacent to the a/bNLS, previously
identified by yeast two-hybrid analysis, is functional as an NLS, recognized with
high affinity by importin beta, and able to target beta-galactosidase to the
nucleus. Intriguingly, the bNLS is highly conserved among Dengue and related
flaviviruses, implying a general role for the region and importin beta in the
infectious cycle.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M204977200 
PMID: 12105224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

