
1. J Virol. 2002 Sep;76(17):8710-21.

Down regulation of the interleukin-8 promoter by human papillomavirus type 16 E6 
and E7 through effects on CREB binding protein/p300 and P/CAF.

Huang SM(1), McCance DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology. The Cancer Center, University of
Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Previously, we reported that human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 E6 binds to C/H1,
C/H3, and the C-terminal domains of coactivators p300 and CBP, causing the
modulation of the transcription of certain genes controlled by NF-kappaB (p65 or 
relA) and p53. To establish the biological significance of these observations, we
have focused on the transcriptional regulation of interleukin-8 (IL-8), a potent 
chemoattractant for T lymphocytes and neutrophils, which is also essential for
the initiation of the local immune response. The IL-8 promoter is regulated by
NF-kappaB/p65 in response to tumor necrosis factor alpha and requires the
cooperation of the coactivators CBP/p300 and steroid receptor coactivator 1
(SRC-1) and the p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) for optimal activation. Here
we report that, in the presence of HPV-16 E6, the promoter activity of IL-8 was
repressed. Moreover, from the mutational analysis of the IL-8 promoter, we found 
that E6 down-regulates the IL-8 promoter activity through the NF-kappaB/p65
binding site. This inhibition appears to result from the ability of HPV-16 E6 to 
compete with NF-kappaB/p65 and SRC-1 for binding to the N terminus and C terminus
of CBP, respectively. Reporter data also showed that E7 represses IL-8 promoter
activity, though to a lesser extent than E6 but, like E6, the repression by E7 is
through the NF-kappaB/p65 binding site. E7 was shown for the first time to bind
to P/CAF, and the binding was necessary for the down regulation of the IL-8
promoter. E6 and E7 together inhibited transcription of the IL-8 promoter to a
greater extent than either alone. Finally, by RNase protection assay, we showed
that the synthesis of endogenous IL-8 mRNA was repressed in keratinocytes stably 
expressing E6 and E7. Taken together, the results provide evidence that E6 and E7
can cooperatively disrupt IL-8 transcription through disruption of
transcriptional active complexes, and this may have important consequences for
immune responses in infected hosts.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.17.8710-8721.2002 
PMCID: PMC136974
PMID: 12163591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

