
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 18;277(42):39850-7. Epub 2002 Aug 13.

Negative regulation of Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1-mediated
functions by the bone morphogenetic protein receptor IA-binding protein, BRAM1.

Chung PJ(1), Chang YS, Liang CL, Meng CL.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei
114, Taiwan, Republic of China.

The latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) of Epstein-Barr virus causes cellular
transformation and activates several intracellular signals, including NF-kappaB
and c-Jun N-terminal kinase. Using yeast two-hybrid screening with the LMP1
C-terminal sequence as bait, we demonstrate that BRAM1 (bone morphogenetic
protein receptor-associated molecule 1) is an LMP1-interacting protein. BRAM1
associates with LMP1, both in vitro and in vivo, as revealed by confocal
microscopy, glutathione S-transferase pull-down, and co-immunoprecipitation
assays. This association mainly involves the C-terminal half of BRAM1 comprising 
the MYND domain and the CTAR2 region of LMP1, which is critical in LMP1-mediated 
signaling pathways. We show that BRAM1 interferes with LMP1-mediated NF-kappaB
activation but not the JNK signaling pathway. Because the CTAR2 region interacts 
with the tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha receptor-associated death domain
protein, it is interesting to find that BRAM1 also interferes with NF-kappaB
activation mediated by TNF-alpha. BRAM1 interferes LMP1-mediated and
TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB activation by targeting IkappaBalpha molecules.
Moreover, BRAM1 inhibits the resistance of LMP1-expressing cells to
TNF-alpha-induced cytotoxicity. We therefore propose that the BRAM1 molecule
associates with LMP1 and functions as a negative regulator of LMP1-mediated
biological functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M206736200 
PMID: 12181323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

