
1. J Immunol. 2002 Sep 15;169(6):3307-13.

HIV-1 transcription and virus production are both accentuated by the
proinflammatory myeloid-related proteins in human CD4+ T lymphocytes.

Ryckman C(1), Robichaud GA, Roy J, Cantin R, Tremblay MJ, Tessier PA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie, Pavillon Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, and Département
de Biologie Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Québec, Canada.

S100A8, S100A9, and S100A12, collectively known as myeloid-related proteins
(MRPs), are highly expressed by the myeloid cell lineage and are found in the
extracellular milieu during infections and inflammatory conditions. Recent data
showed high levels of MRPs in the serum of HIV type 1 (HIV-1)-infected patients
which correlated with disease progression and low CD4(+) counts. Therefore, we
set out to investigate the effect of MRPs on HIV-1 replication. We observed a 4- 
to 5-fold induction of virus production in J1.1, a human T lymphoid cell line
latently infected with HIV-1, following treatment with MRPs. Using
luciferase-based reporter gene assays, we demonstrated that MRPs induce a dose-
and time-dependent activation of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat promoter region
that could be blocked by specific anti-MRP polyclonal Abs and by physical
denaturation of these proteins. The MRP-mediated induction was acting through the
HIV-1 enhancer sequence and was dependent upon NF-kappaB activity. These latter
results were also confirmed by EMSA experiments conducted in Jurkat cells and
freshly isolated PBMCs. In conclusion, we demonstrate that MRPs induce HIV-1
transcriptional activity and viral replication in infected CD4(+) T-lymphocytes
at concentrations similar to those found in the serum of HIV-1-infected patients.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.6.3307 
PMID: 12218151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

