
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):9353-60. Epub 2003 Jan 8.

Suppression of hepatitis B virus core promoter by the nuclear orphan receptor
TR4.

Lin WJ(1), Li J, Lee YF, Yeh SD, Altuwaijri S, Ou JH, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

The TR4 orphan receptor is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily that
modulates gene expression via binding to the AGGTCA direct repeat hormone
response element. Here we report a functional study of TR4 interaction with the
core promoter of the hepatitis B virus (HBV). The electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay shows that TR4 can bind to the direct repeat 1 sequence element
(AGGTTAAAGGTCT, nucleotide coordinates 1757-1769, TR4RE-HBV) on the HBV core
promoter. TR4 also can enhance the activity of a synthetic luciferase reporter
linked with four copies of TR4RE-HBV in either liver HepG2 or non-liver H1299
cells in a dose-dependent manner. Surprisingly, TR4 represses the activity of a
luciferase reporter containing the entire HBV genome sequences. Moreover,
mutation of this TR4RE-HBV site in the HBV core promoter diminishes the TR4
suppression effect. This TR4-induced suppression of HBV core promoter activity is
further confirmed by primer extension analysis of the HBV core RNAs, showing that
TR4 represses both pre-core and core mRNAs. Further dissection of this repressive
mechanism indicates that TR4 may suppress the HBV core promoter activity via
repressing HNF4alpha-mediated transactivation by protein-protein interactions
without inhibition of HNF4alpha DNA binding. Furthermore, our results indicate
that the N- and C-terminal regions of TR4 protein are required for TR4-HNF4alpha 
interaction. It is possible that TR4-HNF4alpha interaction may block the
HNF4alpha function that results in the suppression of HBV gene expression.
Together, these results demonstrate that TR4 can serve as a negative modulator in
the transcriptional regulation of HBV core gene expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M205944200 
PMID: 12522137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

