
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 16;278(20):18256-64. Epub 2003 Feb 20.

The hepatitis C virus NS2 protein is an inhibitor of CIDE-B-induced apoptosis.

Erdtmann L(1), Franck N, Lerat H, Le Seyec J, Gilot D, Cannie I, Gripon P, Hibner
U, Guguen-Guillouzo C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U522, HÃ´pital de Pontchaillou, 35033 Rennes Cedex, France.
lars.erdtmann@univ-rennes1.fr

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection frequently leads to liver cancer. To
determine the viral factor(s) potentially involved in viral persistence, we
focused our work on NS2, a viral protein of unknown function. To assign a role
for NS2, we searched for cellular proteins that interact with NS2. Performing a
two-hybrid screen on a human liver cDNA library, we found that NS2 interacted
with the liver-specific pro-apoptotic CIDE-B protein. Binding specificity of NS2 
for CIDE-B was confirmed by cell-free assays associated with colocalization
studies and coprecipitation experiments on human endogenous CIDE-B. CIDE-B, a
member of the novel CIDE family of apoptosis-inducing factors, has been reported 
to show strong cell death-inducing activity in its C-terminal domain. We show
that this CIDE-B killing domain is involved in the NS2 interaction. NS2 binding
was sufficient to inhibit CIDE-B-induced apoptosis because an NS2 deletion mutant
unable to interact with CIDE-B in vitro lost its capacity to interfere with
CIDE-B cell death activity. Although it has been reported that CIDE-B-induced
apoptosis is characterized by mitochondrial localization, the precise apoptotic
mechanism remained unknown. Here, we show that CIDE-B induced cell death in a
caspase-dependent manner through cytochrome c release from mitochondria.
Furthermore, we found that NS2 counteracted the cytochrome c release induced by
CIDE-B. In vivo, the CIDE-B protein level was extremely low in
adenovirus-infected transgenic mice expressing the HCV polyprotein compared with 
that in wild-type mice. We suggest that NS2 interferes with the CIDE-B-induced
death pathway and participates in HCV strategies to subvert host cell defense.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M209732200 
PMID: 12595532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

