
1. J Virol. 2003 May;77(9):5167-77.

Activity of the human papillomavirus type 16 late negative regulatory element is 
partly due to four weak consensus 5' splice sites that bind a U1 snRNP-like
complex.

Cumming SA(1), McPhillips MG, Veerapraditsin T, Milligan SG, Graham SV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Division of Virology, University of
Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom.

The human papillomavirus (HPV) life cycle is tightly linked to differentiation of
the squamous epithelia that it infects. Capsid proteins, and hence mature
virions, are produced in the outermost layer of differentiated cells. As late
gene transcripts are produced in the lower layers, posttranscriptional mechanisms
likely prevent capsid protein production in less differentiated cells. For HPV
type 16 (HPV-16), a 79-nucleotide (nt) negative regulatory element (NRE) inhibits
gene expression in basal epithelial cells. To identify key NRE sequences, we
carried out transient transfection in basal epithelial cells with reporter
constructs containing the HPV-16 late 3' untranslated region with deletions and
mutations of the NRE. Reporter gene expression was increased over 40-fold by
deletion of the entire element, 10-fold by deletion of the 5' portion of the NRE 
that contains four weak consensus 5' splice sites, and only 3-fold by deletion of
the 3' GU-rich region. Both portions of the element appear to be necessary for
full repression. Inactivating mutations in the 5' splice sites in the 5' NRE
partially alleviated repression in the context of the 79-nt NRE but caused full
derepression when assayed in a construct with the 3' NRE deleted. All four
contribute to the inhibitory effect, though the second splice site is most
inhibitory. Sm proteins, U1A and U1 snRNA, but not U1 70K, could be affinity
purified with the wild-type NRE but not with the NRE containing mutations in the 
5' splice sites, indicating that a U1 snRNP-like complex forms upon the element.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.9.5167-5177.2003 
PMCID: PMC153945
PMID: 12692219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

