
1. J Virol. 2003 Jun;77(12):7041-7.

Interactions of rotavirus VP4 spike protein with the endosomal protein Rab5 and
the prenylated Rab acceptor PRA1.

Enouf V(1), Chwetzoff S, Trugnan G, Cohen J.

Author information: 
(1)Virologie Mol√©culaire et Structurale, UMR CNRS-INRA 2472, F-91190
Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Rotavirus spike protein VP4 is implicated in several important functions, such as
cell attachment, penetration, hemagglutination, neutralization, virulence, and
host range. It is present at the plasma membrane and colocalizes with the
cytoskeleton in infected cells. We looked for cellular partners responsible for
the localization of VP4 by two-hybrid screening of a monkey CV1 cell cDNA
library. In the screen we isolated repeatedly three cDNAs encoding either two
isoforms (a and c) of Rab5 protein or the prenylated Rab acceptor (PRA1). The
small GTPase Rab5 is a molecule regulating the vesicular traffic and the motility
of early endosomes along microtubules. Rab5 interacts with a large number of
effectors, in particular with PRA1. Interactions of VP4 with both partners, Rab5 
and PRA1, were confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation from infected- or
transfected-cell lysates. Interaction of Rab5 and PRA1 was restricted to free
VP4, since neither triple-layered particles nor NSP4-VP4-VP7 heterotrimeric
complexes could be coprecipitated. Site-directed and deletion mutants of VP4 were
used to map a VP4 domain(s) interacting with Rab5 or PRA1. Of the 10 mutants
tested, 2 interacted exclusively with a single partner. In contrast, the domain
extending from amino acids 560 to 722 of VP4 is essential for both interactions. 
These results suggest that Rab5 and PRA1 may be involved in the localization and 
trafficking of VP4 in infected cells.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.12.7041-7047.2003 
PMCID: PMC156175
PMID: 12768023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

