
1. Virology. 2003 Aug 15;313(1):224-34.

Adenovirus ADP protein (E3-11.6K), which is required for efficient cell lysis and
virus release, interacts with human MAD2B.

Ying B(1), Wold WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, St. Louis University
School of Medicine, 1402 South Grand Boulevard, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

The human subgroup C adenovirus (Ad) protein named adenovirus death protein (ADP)
(previously named E3-11.6K) is synthesized at very late stages of infection when 
it mediates efficient lysis of cells and release of adenovirus to infect other
cells. ADP is an integral membrane N-linked, O-linked palmitoylated glycoprotein 
of 101 amino acids (aa) that localizes to the nuclear membrane, endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), and Golgi. It has a single membrane spanning region (roughly aa
40-60) and is oriented with aa 1-40 in the lumen and aa 61-101 in the nucleoplasm
and cytoplasm. Using aa 61-101 of Ad2 ADP as bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen,
we isolated a cDNA for a 211-aa protein that initially was not in the database
but has now been published by others with the names human MAD2B, MAD2L2, and
REV7. ADP binds strongly to human MAD2B not only in yeast but also in GST
pull-down experiments and in coimmunoprecipitations of ADP and MAD2B synthesized 
in vitro or in vivo. ADP mutants with deletions throughout the bait region do not
interact with human MAD2B, whereas a Pro69Pro70 to Ala69Ala70 mutant in the
"basic-proline" domain of ADP does interact. Northern blot analyses indicate that
human MAD2B is expressed ubiquitously. Human MAD2B is about 25% identical to
human MAD2, a spindle assembly checkpoint protein. Two human A549 cell lines were
made that constitutively overexpress MAD2B. Wild-type adenovirus lyses these
cells significantly more slowly than it lyses parental A549 cells, raising the
possibility that ADP and MAD2B act in opposition and suggesting that the
ADP-MAD2B interaction is biologically relevant.

DOI: 10.1016/s0042-6822(03)00287-3 
PMID: 12951035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

