
1. EMBO J. 1992 Dec;11(13):4851-9.

The BPV-1 E5 protein, the 16 kDa membrane pore-forming protein and the PDGF
receptor exist in a complex that is dependent on hydrophobic transmembrane
interactions.

Goldstein DJ(1), Andresson T, Sparkowski JJ, Schlegel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Georgetown University Medical School, Washington, DC 
20007.

The E5 oncoprotein of bovine papillomavirus type 1 is a 44 amino acid, highly
hydrophobic protein that induces the stable transformation of immortalized murine
fibroblasts, presumably through its activation of growth factor receptors.
Previous studies have shown that the E5 protein complexes with the 16 kDa (16k)
pore-forming protein of vacuolar H(+)-ATPases. This integral membrane protein is 
essential for the acidification and function of subcellular compartments that
process growth factor receptors. Using an SV40 expression system in COS cells, we
analyzed whether the E5-16k complexes bind additional cellular proteins,
including growth factor receptors. These studies demonstrate that E5 binds to
both the 16k protein and the PDGF receptor and that this tri-component complex
can be isolated with antibodies specific for each protein. Importantly, the 16k
protein bound to the PDGF receptor in the absence of E5, suggesting that E5 binds
to the PDGF receptor via its interaction with the 16k protein. An E5 mutant
lacking the hydrophilic carboxyl-terminal 14 amino acids retained binding to both
16k and the PDGF receptor, indicating that E5 binds to these proteins through its
hydrophobic, membrane-associating domain. These studies reveal that hydrophobic, 
intramembrane interactions govern the association of E5, 16k and the PDGF
receptor, suggesting a ligand-independent mechanism for receptor activation and a
potential link between receptor signal transduction pathways and membrane pore
activity.


PMCID: PMC556961
PMID: 1334459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

