
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7498-509.

Modulation of retinoid signaling by a cytoplasmic viral protein via sequestration
of Sp110b, a potent transcriptional corepressor of retinoic acid receptor, from
the nucleus.

Watashi K(1), Hijikata M, Tagawa A, Doi T, Marusawa H, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Tumor Viruses, Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for
Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein (core) plays a significant role in the
development of chronic liver diseases caused by HCV infection. We have discovered
that the core sensitized all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)-induced cell death in
MCF-7 cells. Activation of retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha)-mediated
transcription by the core was also seen in all the cell lines tested. By use of a
yeast two-hybrid system, we identified Sp110b as a candidate for a
core-interacting cellular factor. Although the function of Sp110b has remained
unknown, we observed that Sp110b interacts with RARalpha and suppresses
RARalpha-mediated transcription. These data suggest that Sp110b is a
transcriptional cofactor negatively regulating RARalpha-mediated transcription.
RNA interference-mediated reduction of endogenous Sp110b levels depressed the
ability of the core to activate RARalpha-mediated transcription, suggesting an
essential role for Sp110b in this pathway. The normal nuclear subcellular
localization of Sp110b was altered by molecular interaction with the core to the 
cytoplasmic surface of the endoplasmic reticulum. This evidence suggests a model 
in which the core sequesters Sp110b from the nucleus and inactivates its
corepressor function to activate RARalpha-mediated transcription. These findings 
likely describe a novel system in which a cytoplasmic viral protein regulates
host cell transcription.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.23.21.7498-7509.2003 
PMCID: PMC207568
PMID: 14559998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

