
1. J Virol. 2003 Nov;77(22):11992-2001.

Telomere repeat binding factors TRF1, TRF2, and hRAP1 modulate replication of
Epstein-Barr virus OriP.

Deng Z(1), Atanasiu C, Burg JS, Broccoli D, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus OriP confers cell cycle-dependent DNA replication and stable
maintenance on plasmids in EBNA1-positive cells. The dyad symmetry region of OriP
contains four EBNA1 binding sites that are punctuated by 9-bp repeats referred to
as nonamers. Previous work has shown that the nonamers bind to cellular factors
associated with human telomeres and contribute to episomal maintenance of OriP.
In this work, we show that substitution mutation of all three nonamer sites
reduces both DNA replication and plasmid maintenance of OriP-containing plasmids 
by 2.5- to 5-fold. The nonamers were required for high-affinity binding of TRF1, 
TRF2, and hRap1 to the dyad symmetry element but were not essential for the
binding of EBNA1 as determined by DNA affinity purification from nuclear
extracts. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that TRF1, TRF2, and
hRap1 bound OriP in vivo. Cell cycle studies indicate that TRF2 binding to OriP
peaks in G(1)/S while TRF1 binding peaks in G(2)/M. OriP replication was
inhibited by transfection of full-length TRF1 but not by deletion mutants lacking
the myb DNA binding domain. In contrast, OriP replication was not affected by
transfection of full-length TRF2 or hRap1 but was potently inhibited by
dominant-negative TRF2 or hRap1 amino-terminal truncation mutants. Knockdown
experiments with short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) directed against TRF2 and hRap1 
severely reduced OriP replication, while TRF1 siRNA had a modest stimulatory
effect on OriP replication. These results indicate that TRF2 and hRap1 promote,
while TRF1 antagonizes, OriP-dependent DNA replication and suggest that these
telomeric factors contribute to the establishment of replication competence at
OriP.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.22.11992-12001.2003 
PMCID: PMC254251
PMID: 14581536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

