
1. J Virol. 2004 Jun;78(11):5633-41.

Nipah virus V and W proteins have a common STAT1-binding domain yet inhibit STAT1
activation from the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments, respectively.

Shaw ML(1), Garc√≠a-Sastre A, Palese P, Basler CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Box 1124, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One
Gustave L. Levy Pl., New York, NY 10029, USA.

In previous reports it was demonstrated that the Nipah virus V and W proteins
have interferon (IFN) antagonist activity due to their ability to block signaling
from the IFN-alpha/beta receptor (J. J. Rodriguez, J. P. Parisien, and C. M.
Horvath, J. Virol. 76:11476-11483, 2002; M. S. Park et al., J. Virol.
77:1501-1511, 2003). The V, W, and P proteins are all encoded by the same viral
gene and share an identical 407-amino-acid N-terminal region but have distinct
C-terminal sequences. We now show that the P protein also has anti-IFN function, 
confirming that the common N-terminal domain is responsible for the antagonist
activity. Truncation of this N-terminal domain revealed that amino acids 50 to
150 retain the ability to block IFN and to bind STAT1, a key component of the IFN
signaling pathway. Subcellular localization studies demonstrate that the V and P 
proteins are predominantly cytoplasmic whereas the W protein is localized to the 
nucleus. In all cases, STAT1 colocalizes with the corresponding Nipah virus
protein. These interactions are sufficient to inhibit STAT1 activation, as
demonstrated by the lack of STAT1 phosphorylation on tyrosine 701 in
IFN-stimulated cells expressing P, V, or W. Therefore, despite their common
STAT1-binding domain, the Nipah virus V and P proteins act by retaining STAT1 in 
the cytoplasm while the W protein sequesters STAT1 in the nucleus, creating both 
a cytoplasmic and a nuclear block for STAT1. We also show that the IFN antagonist
activity of the P protein is not as strong as that of V or W, perhaps explaining 
why Nipah virus has evolved to express these two edited products.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.11.5633-5641.2004 
PMCID: PMC415790
PMID: 15140960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

