
1. J Virol. 2004 Jun;78(11):5564-75.

Conformational changes in the nuclear lamina induced by herpes simplex virus type
1 require genes U(L)31 and U(L)34.

Reynolds AE(1), Liang L, Baines JD.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Microbiology and Immunology, VMC C5 131, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY 14853, USA.

The herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) U(L)31 and U(L)34 proteins are dependent 
on each other for proper targeting to the nuclear membrane and are required for
efficient envelopment of nucleocapsids at the inner nuclear membrane. In this
work, we show that whereas the solubility of lamins A and C (lamin A/C) was not
markedly increased, HSV induced conformational changes in the nuclear lamina of
infected cells, as viewed after staining with three different lamin A/C-specific 
antibodies. In one case, reactivity with a monoclonal antibody that recognizes an
epitope in the lamin tail domain was greatly reduced in HSV-infected cells. This 
apparent HSV-induced epitope masking required both U(L)31 and U(L)34, but these
proteins were not sufficient to mask the epitope in uninfected cells, indicating 
that other HSV proteins are also required. In the second case, staining with a
rabbit polyclonal antibody that primarily recognizes epitopes in the lamin A/C
rod domain revealed that U(L)34 is required for HSV-induced decreased
availability of epitopes for reaction with the antibody, whereas U(L)31 protein
was dispensable for this effect. Still another polyclonal antibody indicated
virtually no difference in lamin A/C staining in infected versus uninfected
cells, indicating that the HSV-induced changes are more conformational than the
result of lamin depletion at the nuclear rim. Further evidence supporting an
interaction between the nuclear lamina and the U(L)31/U(L)34 protein complex
includes the observations that (i) overexpression of the U(L)31 protein in
uninfected cells was sufficient to relocalize lamin A/C from the nuclear rim into
nucleoplasmic aggregates, (ii) overexpression of U(L)34 was sufficient to
relocalize some lamin A/C into the cytoplasm, and (iii) both U(L)31 and U(L)34
could directly bind lamin A/C in vitro. These studies suggest that the U(L)31 and
U(L)34 proteins modify the conformation of the nuclear lamina in infected cells, 
possibly by direct interaction with lamin A/C, and that other proteins are also
likely involved. Given that the nuclear lamina potentially excludes nucleocapsids
from envelopment sites at the inner nuclear membrane, the lamina alteration may
reflect a role of the U(L)31/U(L)34 protein complex in perturbing the lamina to
promote nucleocapsid egress from the nucleus. Alternatively, the data are
compatible with a role of the lamina in targeting the U(L)31/U(L)34 protein
complex to the nuclear membrane.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.11.5564-5575.2004 
PMCID: PMC415827
PMID: 15140953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

