
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 30;279(31):32524-33. Epub 2004 May 20.

The CXC chemokine receptor encoded by herpesvirus saimiri, ECRF3, shows
ligand-regulated signaling through Gi, Gq, and G12/13 proteins but constitutive
signaling only through Gi and G12/13 proteins.

Rosenkilde MM(1), McLean KA, Holst PJ, Schwartz TW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, Panum
Institute, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
roenkilde@molpharm.dk

Open reading frame 74 (ORF74) of many gamma(2)-herpesviruses encodes a CXC
chemokine receptor. The molecular pharmacological profile of ORF74 from
herpesvirus saimiri, ECRF3, is characterized here and compared with that of the
well known ORF74 from human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8). The ECRF3 receptor bound the
so-called ELR (Glu-Leu-Arg) CXC chemokines (125)I-CXCL1/GRO alpha,
(125)I-CXCL6/GCP-2, and (125)I-CXCL8/interleukin-8 with high affinity; but in
contrast to ORF74 from HHV8, it did not bind the non-ELR CXC chemokine
(125)I-CXCL10/IP10. Interestingly, the B(max) value for CXCL6/GCP-2 was 3-fold
higher than the capacity for maximal binding of CXCL1/GRO alpha to ECRF3 and
85-fold higher than that of CXCL8/interleukin-8, despite similar affinities. Like
ORF74 from HHV8, ECRF3 activated a broad range of pathways (G(q), G(i), and
G(12/13) as well as the cAMP response element-binding protein, NF-kappa B, NFAT, 
and serum response element transcription factors) in a ligand-regulated manner,
with CXCL6/GCP-2 being the most potent and efficacious agonist. ECRF3 signaled
constitutively through G(i) and G(12/13), but surprisingly not through G(q). At
the level of transcription factor activation, the serum response element was
activated constitutively by ECRF3, whereas cAMP response element-binding protein,
NFAT, and NF-kappa B were only ligand-regulated. The maximal signaling capacities
were similar for the two receptors; however, the ligand-regulated signaling was
responsible for the major part of the total ECRF3 signaling and only for a minor 
part of the total HHV8 ORF74 signaling. The activation pattern of ECRF3 with
constitutive activation of some (but not all) of the employed pathways has not
been seen before in endogenous or virus-encoded chemokine receptors. The results 
suggest that the unique ligand selectivity of ECRF3 among ORF74 receptors could
reflect differences in the cellular tropism of the gamma(2)-herpesviruses.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M313392200 
PMID: 15155729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

