
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 10;279(37):38325-30. Epub 2004 Jul 5.

ORF36 protein kinase of Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus activates the c-Jun
N-terminal kinase signaling pathway.

Hamza MS(1), Reyes RA, Izumiya Y, Wisdom R, Kung HJ, Luciw PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Medicine, University of California, Davis, California
95616, USA.

alpha-, beta-, and gamma-Herpesviruses encode putative viral protein kinases. The
herpes simplex virus UL13, varicella-zoster virus ORF47, and Epstein-Barr virus
BGLF4 genes all show protein kinase domains in their protein sequences.
Mutational analysis of these herpesviruses demonstrated that the viral kinase is 
important for optimal virus growth. Previous studies have shown that ORF36 of
Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) has protein kinase activity and is
autophosphorylated on serine. The gene for ORF36 is expressed during lytic growth
of the virus and has been classified as a late gene. Inspection of the ORF36
sequence indicated potential motifs that could be involved in activation of
cellular transcription factors. To analyze the function of ORF36, the cDNA for
this viral gene was tagged with the FLAG epitope and inserted into an expression 
vector for mammalian cells. Transfection experiments in 293T and SLK cells
demonstrated that expression of ORF36 resulted in phosphorylation of the c-Jun
N-terminal kinase. Autophosphorylation of ORF36 is important for JNK activation
because a mutation in the predicted catalytic domain of ORF36 blocked its ability
to phosphorylate JNK. Western blot analysis, using phosphospecific antibodies,
revealed that mitogen-activated kinases MKK4 and MKK7 were phosphorylated by
ORF36 but not by the kinase-negative mutant. Binding experiments in transfected
cells also demonstrated that both the wild type and kinase-negative mutant of
ORF36 form a complex with JNK, MKK4, and MKK7. In addition, using a
tetracycline-inducible Rta BCBL-1 cell line (TREx BCBL1-Rta), JNK was
phosphorylated during lytic replication, and inhibition of JNK activation blocked
late viral gene expression but not early viral gene expression. In summary, these
studies demonstrate that KSHV ORF36 activates the JNK pathway; thus this cell
signaling pathway may function in the KSHV life cycle by regulating viral and/or 
cellular transcription.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M400964200 
PMID: 15247271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

