
1. J Virol. 2004 Oct;78(20):10856-64.

Nuclear respiratory factor 1 plays an essential role in transcriptional
initiation from the hepatitis B virus x gene promoter.

Tokusumi Y(1), Zhou S, Takada S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Box 117, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The X gene of hepatitis B virus (HBV) is one of the major factors in HBV-induced 
hepatocarcinogenesis and is essential for the establishment of productive HBV
replication in vivo. Recent studies have shown that the X gene product targets
mitochondria and induces calcium flux, thereby activating Ca(+)-dependent signal 
transduction pathways. However, regulatory mechanisms of X gene expression have
remained unclear. Previous studies had localized a minimal promoter activity to a
21-bp GC-rich sequence located 130 bp upstream of the X protein coding region and
showed that there was a cellular protein bound to this DNA. Interestingly, the
21-bp sequence identified as an X gene minimal promoter does not contain any
previously identified core promoter elements, such as a TATA box. To better
understand the mechanisms of transcriptional initiation of the X gene, we set out
to biochemically purify the binding protein(s) for the 21-bp DNA. We report here 
the identification of the X gene minimal promoter-binding activity as nuclear
respiratory factor 1 (NRF1), a previously known transcription factor that
activates the majority of nucleus-encoded mitochondrial genes and various
housekeeping genes. Primer extension analyses of the X mRNAs show that mutations 
at the binding site specifically inactivate transcription from this promoter and 
that a dominant-negative NRF1 mutant and short interfering RNAs inhibit
transcription from this promoter. Therefore, NRF1 specifically binds the 21-bp
minimal promoter and positively contributes to transcription of the X gene.
Simultaneous activation of the X gene and mitochondrial genes by NRF1 may allow
the X protein to target mitochondria most efficiently.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.20.10856-10864.2004 
PMCID: PMC521811
PMID: 15452206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

