
1. J Proteome Res. 2004 Sep-Oct;3(5):949-57.

Riboproteomics of the hepatitis C virus internal ribosomal entry site.

Lu H(1), Li W, Noble WS, Payan D, Anderson DC.

Author information: 
(1)Rigel, Inc., South San Francisco, California 94066, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) protein translation is mediated by a cis-acting RNA, an
internal ribosomal entry site (IRES), located in the 5' nontranslated region of
the viral RNA. To examine proteins bound to the IRES, which could include
proteins important for its function as well as potential drug targets, we used
shotgun peptide sequencing to identify proteins in quadruplicate protein affinity
extracts of lysed Huh7 cells, obtained using a biotinylated IRES. Twenty-six
proteins bound the HCV IRES but not a reversed complementary sequence RNA or
vector RNA controls. These included five ribosomal subunits, nine eukaryotic
initiation factor 3 subunits, and novel interacting proteins such as the
cytoskeletal-related proteins actin, FHOS (formin homologue overexpressed in
spleen) and MIP-T3 (microtubule interacting protein that associates with TRAF3). 
Other novel HCV IRES-binding proteins included UNR (upstream of N-ras),
UNR-interacting protein, and the RNA-binding proteins PAI-1 (plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1) mRNA binding protein and Ewing sarcoma breakpoint 1 region
protein EWS. A large set of additional proteins bound both the HCV IRES and a
reversed complementary IRES sequence control, including the known HCV interactors
PTB (polypyrimidine tract binding protein), the La autoantigen, and nucleolin.
The discovery of these novel HCV IRES-binding proteins suggests links between
IRES biology and the cytoskeleton, signal transduction, and other cellular
functions.

DOI: 10.1021/pr0499592 
PMID: 15473682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

