
1. J Virol. 2004 Nov;78(22):12566-75.

ORC, MCM, and histone hyperacetylation at the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus latent replication origin.

Stedman W(1), Deng Z, Lu F, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4268, USA.

The viral genome of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) persists as an
extrachromosomal plasmid in latently infected cells. The KSHV latency-associated 
nuclear antigen (LANA) stimulates plasmid maintenance and DNA replication by
binding to an approximately 150-bp region within the viral terminal repeats (TR).
We have used chromatin immunoprecipitation assays to demonstrate that LANA binds 
specifically to the replication origin sequence within the KSHV TR in latently
infected cells. The latent replication origin within the TR was also bound by
LANA-associated proteins CBP, double-bromodomain-containing protein 2 (BRD2), and
the origin recognition complex 2 protein (ORC2) and was enriched in
hyperacetylated histones H3 and H4 relative to other regions of the latent
genome. Cell cycle analysis indicated that the minichromosome maintenance complex
protein, MCM3, bound TR in late-G(1)/S-arrested cells, which coincided with the
loss of histone H3 K4 methylation. Micrococcal nuclease studies revealed that TRs
are embedded in a highly ordered nucleosome array that becomes disorganized in
late G(1)/S phase. ORC binding to TR was LANA dependent when reconstituted in
transfected plasmids. DNA affinity purification confirmed that LANA, CBP, BRD2,
and ORC2 bound TR specifically and identified the histone acetyltransferase HBO1 
(histone acetyltransferase binding to ORC1) as a potential TR binding protein.
Disruption of ORC2, MCM5, and HBO1 expression by small interfering RNA reduced
LANA-dependent DNA replication of TR-containing plasmids. These findings are the 
first demonstration that cellular replication and origin licensing factors are
required for KSHV latent cycle replication. These results also suggest that the
KSHV latent origin of replication is a unique chromatin environment containing
histone H3 hyperacetylation within heterochromatic tandem repeats.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.22.12566-12575.2004 
PMCID: PMC525046
PMID: 15507644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

