
1. Biochem J. 2005 Apr 15;387(Pt 2):295-308.

The prototype gamma-2 herpesvirus nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein, ORF 57,
transports viral RNA through the cellular mRNA export pathway.

Williams BJ(1), Boyne JR, Goodwin DJ, Roaden L, Hautbergue GM, Wilson SA,
Whitehouse A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Manchester Institute of
Science and Technology, Manchester M60 1QD, UK.

HVS (herpesvirus saimiri) is the prototype gamma-2 herpesvirus. This is a
subfamily of herpesviruses gaining importance since the identification of the
first human gamma-2 herpesvirus, Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. The HVS
ORF 57 (open reading frame 57) protein is a multifunctional transregulatory
protein homologous with genes identified in all classes of herpesviruses. Recent 
work has demonstrated that ORF 57 has the ability to bind viral RNA, shuttles
between the nucleus and cytoplasm and promotes the nuclear export of viral
transcripts. In the present study, we show that ORF 57 shuttles between the
nucleus and cytoplasm in a CRM-1 (chromosomal region maintenance 1)-independent
manner. ORF 57 interacts with the mRNA export factor REF (RNA export factor) and 
two other components of the exon junction complex, Y14 and Magoh. The association
of ORF 57 with REF stimulates recruitment of the cellular mRNA export factor TAP 
(Tip-associated protein), and HVS infection triggers the relocalization of REF
and TAP from the nuclear speckles to several large clumps within the cell. Using 
a dominant-negative form of TAP and RNA interference to deplete TAP, we show that
it is essential for bulk mRNA export in mammalian cells and is required for ORF
57-mediated viral RNA export. Furthermore, we show that the disruption of TAP
reduces viral replication. These results indicate that HVS utilizes ORF 57 to
recruit components of the exon junction complex and subsequently TAP to promote
viral RNA export through the cellular mRNA export pathway.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20041223 
PMCID: PMC1134957
PMID: 15537388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

