
1. Oncogene. 2005 Feb 10;24(7):1262-71.

HTLV-I Tax induces and associates with Crk-associated substrate lymphocyte type
(Cas-L).

Iwata S(1), Souta-Kuribara A, Yamakawa A, Sasaki T, Shimizu T, Hosono O, Kawasaki
H, Tanaka H, Dang NH, Watanabe T, Arima N, Morimoto C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Advanced Clinical Research Center, Institute 
of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo
108-8639, Japan.

Crk-associated substrate lymphocyte type (Cas-L) is a docking protein that is
heavily tyrosine phosphorylated by the engagement of beta1 integrins in T cells. 
In the present study, we attempted to evaluate the role of Cas-L in the
pathophysiology of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL). Examination of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from ATL patients as well as ATL-derived T cell lines showed an
elevation of Cas-L in these cells. We showed that tyrosine phosphorylation as
well as expression of Cas-L was markedly elevated through the induction of human 
T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) Tax in JPX-9 cells, with these cells showing
marked motile behavior on the ligands for integrins. We next performed yeast
two-hybrid screening of cDNA library from an HTLV-I-transformed T cell line,
which resulted in the identification of Tax as a putative binding partner for
Cas-L. Co-precipitation experiments revealed that the serine-rich region of Cas-L
might serve as the binding site with the highest affinity for Tax.
Co-localization study showed that Tax and Cas-L partly merged in the cytoplasm.
Finally, we showed that exogenous Cas-L inhibited Tax-mediated transactivation of
nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB), while Tax-independent activation of NF-kappaB 
remained intact, hence indicating that Cas-L might specifically regulate
Tax-NF-kappaB pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208261 
PMID: 15592516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

