
1. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2004 Nov 30;37(6):741-8.

Systematic identification of hepatocellular proteins interacting with NS5A of the
hepatitis C virus.

Ahn J(1), Chung KS, Kim DU, Won M, Kim L, Kim KS, Nam M, Choi SJ, Kim HC, Yoon M,
Chae SK, Hoe KL.

Author information: 
(1)Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Yusong,
Daejeon, Korea.

The hepatitis C virus is associated with the development of liver cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinomas. Among the 10 polyproteins produced by the virus, no
function has been clearly assigned to the non-structural 5A (NS5A) protein. This 
study was designed to identify the hepatocellular proteins that interact with
NS5A of the HCV. Yeast two-hybrid experiments were performed with a human liver
cDNA prey-library, using five different NS5A derivatives as baits, the
full-length NS5A (NS5A-F, amino acid (aa) 1 approximately 447) and its four
different derivatives, denoted as NS5A-A (aa 1 approximately 150), -B (aa 1
approximately 300), -C (aa 300 approximately 447) and D (aa 150 approximately
447). NS5A-F, NS5A-B and NS5A-C gave two, two and 10 candidate clones,
respectively, including an AHNAK-related protein, the secreted frizzled-related
protein 4 (SFRP4), the N-myc downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1), the cellular
retinoic acid binding protein 1 (CRABP-1), ferritin heavy chain (FTH1),
translokin, tumor-associated calcium signal transducer 2 (TACSTD2),
phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase (PI4K) and centaurindelta 2 (CENTdelta2). However, 
NS5A-A produced no candidates and NS5A-D was not suitable as bait due to
transcriptional activity. Based on an in vitro binding assay, CRABP-1, PI4K,
CENTdelta2 and two unknown fusion proteins with maltose binding protein (MBP),
were confirmed to interact with the glutathione S-transferase (GST)/NS5A fusion
protein. Furthermore, the interactions of CRABP-1, PI4K and CENTdelta2 were not
related to the PXXP motif (class II), as judged by a domain analysis. While their
biological relevance is under investigation, the results contribute to a better
understanding of the possible role of NS5A in hepatocellular signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.5483/bmbrep.2004.37.6.741 
PMID: 15607035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

