
1. J Virol. 2005 Feb;79(3):1686-700.

CCR5, GPR15, and CXCR6 are major coreceptors of human immunodeficiency virus type
2 variants isolated from individuals with and without plasma viremia.

Blaak H(1), Boers PH, Gruters RA, Schuitemaker H, van der Ende ME, Osterhaus AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Room Ee1742a, Erasmus MC, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. h.blaak@erasmusmc.nl

Human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) is generally considered capable of
using a broad range of coreceptors. Since HIV-2 variants from individuals with
nonprogressive infection were not studied previously, the possibility that broad 
coreceptor usage is a property of variants associated with progressive infection 
could not be excluded. To test this, we determined the coreceptor usage of 43
HIV-2 variants isolated from six long-term-infected individuals with undetectable
plasma viremia. Using GHOST indicator cells, we showed for the first time that
the only coreceptors efficiently used by low-pathogenic HIV-2 variants are CCR5, 
GPR15 (BOB), and CXCR6 (BONZO). Surprisingly, control HIV-2 variants (n = 45)
isolated from seven viremic individuals also mainly used these three coreceptors,
whereas use of CCR1, CCR2b, or CCR3 was rare. Nearly a quarter of all HIV-2
variants tested could infect the parental GHOST cells, which could be partially
explained by CXCR4 usage. Use of CXCR4 was observed only for HIV-2 variants from 
viremic individuals. Thirty-eight variants from aviremic and viremic
HIV-2-infected individuals were additionally tested in U87 cells. All except one 
were capable of infecting the parental U87 cells, often with high efficiency.
When virus production in parental cells was regarded as background in the
coreceptor-transduced cell lines, the results in U87 cells were largely in
agreement with the findings in GHOST cells. HIV-2 isolates from aviremic
individuals commonly use as coreceptors CCR5, GPR15, and CXCR6, as well as an
unidentified receptor expressed by U87 cells. Broad coreceptor usage, therefore, 
does not appear to be associated with pathogenicity of HIV-2.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.3.1686-1700.2005 
PMCID: PMC544080
PMID: 15650194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

