
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13648-57. Epub 2005 Jan 14.

Granulin and granulin repeats interact with the Tat.P-TEFb complex and inhibit
Tat transactivation.

Hoque M(1), Tian B, Mathews MB, Pe'ery T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey
07103-2714, USA.

The cellular positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), containing
cyclin T1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), interacts with the human
immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1) regulatory protein Tat to enable viral
transcription and replication. Cyclin T1 is an unusually long cyclin and is
engaged by cellular regulatory proteins. Previous studies showed that the
granulin/epithelin precursor (GEP) binds the histidine-rich region of cyclin T1
and inhibits P-TEFb function. GEP is composed of repeats that vary in sequence
and properties. GEP also binds directly to Tat. Here we show that GEP and some of
its constituent granulin repeats can inhibit HIV-1 transcription via Tat without 
directly binding to cyclin T1. The interactions of granulins with Tat and cyclin 
T1 differ with respect to their binding sites and divalent cation requirements,
and we identified granulin repeats that bind differentially to Tat and cyclin T1.
Granulins DE and E bind Tat but do not interact directly with cyclin T1. These
granulins are present in complexes with Tat and P-TEFb in which Tat forms a
bridge between the cellular proteins. Granulins DE and E repress transcription
from the HIV-1 LTR and gene expression from the viral genome, raising the
possibility of developing granulin-based inhibitors of viral infection.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M409575200 
PMID: 15653695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

