
1. Biochemistry. 2005 Mar 1;44(8):2716-31.

Interactions of the HIV-1 Tat and RAP74 proteins with the RNA polymerase II CTD
phosphatase FCP1.

Abbott KL(1), Archambault J, Xiao H, Nguyen BD, Roeder RG, Greenblatt J,
Omichinski JG, Legault P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia 30602, USA.

FCP1, a phosphatase specific for the carboxyl-terminal domain of the largest
subunit of RNA polymerase II, is regulated by the HIV-1 Tat protein, CK2, TFIIB, 
and the large subunit of TFIIF (RAP74). We have characterized the interactions of
Tat and RAP74 with the BRCT-containing central domain of FCP1
(FCP1(562)(-)(738)). We demonstrated that FCP1 is required for Tat-mediated
transactivation in vitro and that amino acids 562-685 of FCP1 are necessary for
Tat interaction in yeast two-hybrid studies. From sequence alignments, we
identified a conserved acidic/hydrophobic region in FCP1 adjacent to its highly
conserved BRCT domain. In vitro binding studies with purified proteins indicate
that HIV-1 Tat interacts with both the acidic/hydrophobic region and the BRCT
domain of FCP1, whereas RAP74(436)(-)(517) interacts solely with a portion of the
acidic/hydrophobic region containing a conserved LXXLL-like motif. HIV-1 Tat
inhibits the binding of RAP74(436)(-)(517) to FCP1. In a companion paper (K.
Abbott et al. (2005) Enhanced Binding of RNAPII CTD Phosphatase FCP1 to RAP74
Following CK2 Phosphorylation, Biochemistry 44, 2732-2745, we identified a novel 
CK2 site adjacent to this conserved LXXLL-like motif. Phosphorylation of
FCP1(562)(-)(619) by CK2 at this site increases binding to RAP74(436)(-)(517),
but this phosphorylation is inhibited by Tat. Our results provide insights into
the mechanisms by which Tat inhibits the FCP1 CTD phosphatase activity and by
which FCP1 mediates transcriptional activation by Tat. In addition to increasing 
our understanding of the role of HIV-1 Tat in transcriptional regulation, this
study defines a clear role for regions adjacent to the BRCT domain in promoting
important protein-protein interactions.

DOI: 10.1021/bi047957p 
PMID: 15723517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

