
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Apr 19;102(16):5838-43. Epub 2005 Apr 11.

Herpes simplex virus 1 infected cell protein 0 forms a complex with CIN85 and Cbl
and mediates the degradation of EGF receptor from cell surfaces.

Liang Y(1), Kurakin A, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Infected cell protein 0 (ICP0) is a 775-residue multifunctional herpes simplex
virus protein associated with numerous functions related to transactivation of
gene expression and repression of host defenses to infection. We report that an
uncharted domain of ICP0 located between residues 245 and 510 contains multiple
SH3 domain binding motifs similar to those required for binding to CIN85, the
M(r) 85,000 protein that interacts with Cbl. CIN85 and Cbl are involved in
endocytosis and negative regulation of numerous receptor tyrosine kinases. We
report that ICP0 binds CIN85 in a reciprocal manner and that the complexes pulled
down by ICP0 also contain Cbl. We tested the role of ICP0 in the down-regulation 
of receptor tyrosine kinases by using epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) as 
a prototypic receptor. In transfection assays, ICP0, in the absence of other
viral genes, down-regulated EGF-dependent expression of a reporter gene
(luciferase). ICP0 also down-regulated both total and cell surface levels of EGFR
in EGF-independent manner. In wild-type virus-infected cells, the surface levels 
of EGFR were also decreased in the absence of EGF stimulation. Stimulation by EGF
enhanced the decrease in surface EGFR. We conclude that ICP0 encodes SH3 domain
binding sites that function to down-regulate signaling pathways associated with
receptor tyrosine kinases. The results suggest that ICP0 precludes signaling to
the infected cells through the receptor tyrosine kinases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0501253102 
PMCID: PMC556299
PMID: 15824310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

