
1. J Virol. 2005 May;79(9):5594-605.

Recruitment of CBP/p300, TATA-binding protein, and S8 to distinct regions at the 
N terminus of adenovirus E1A.

Rasti M(1), Grand RJ, Mymryk JS, Gallimore PH, Turnell AS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research U.K. Institute for Cancer Studies, The Medical School, The
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

The N-terminal region of the adenovirus (Ad) 12S E1A gene product targets several
cellular proteins that are essential for the induction of S phase, cellular
immortalization, cellular transformation, transcriptional repression, and
transcriptional activation. The precise binding sites for these proteins,
however, remain to be resolved. We therefore undertook an extensive site-directed
mutagenesis approach to generate specific point mutants and to precisely map the 
binding sites for CBP, p300, TATA-binding protein (TBP), S4, S8, hGcn5, P/CAF,
and Ran within the first 30 amino acids of the Ad5 12S E1A protein. We determined
that although common residues within the N-terminal region can form partial
binding sites for these proteins, point mutants were also generated that could
discriminate between binding sites. These data indicate that AdE1A can target
each of these proteins individually through distinct binding sites. It was
evident, however, that the mutation of specific hydrophobic residues typically
had the greatest effect upon AdE1A's ability to bind individual partners. Indeed,
the mutation of L at positions 19 and 20 eliminated the ability of AdE1A to
interact with any of the N-terminal binding proteins studied here. Interestingly,
although TBP and S8 or CBP/p300 can exist as functional complexes, RNA
interference revealed that the recruitment of either TBP, S8, or CBP/p300 to
AdE1A was not dependent upon the expression of the other proteins. These data
further indicate that AdE1A can target individual partner proteins in vivo and
that it does not necessarily recruit these proteins indirectly as components of
larger macromolecular complexes. Finally, we took advantage of the fine-mapping
data to ascertain which proteins were targeted during the transformation process.
Consistent with previous studies, CBP/p300 was found to be targeted by AdE1A
during this process, although our data suggest that binding to other N-terminal
proteins is also important for transformation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.9.5594-5605.2005 
PMCID: PMC1082771
PMID: 15827174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

