
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 1;280(26):24948-56. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

Identification of FEZ1 as a protein that interacts with JC virus agnoprotein and 
microtubules: role of agnoprotein-induced dissociation of FEZ1 from microtubules 
in viral propagation.

Suzuki T(1), Okada Y, Semba S, Orba Y, Yamanouchi S, Endo S, Tanaka S, Fujita T, 
Kuroda S, Nagashima K, Sawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, School of Medicine, Core
Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Sapporo, Japan.

The human polyomavirus JC virus (JCV) is the causative agent of a fatal
demyelinating disease, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, and encodes
six major proteins, including agnoprotein. Agnoprotein colocalizes with
microtubules in JCV-infected cells, but its function is not fully understood. We 
have now identified fasciculation and elongation protein zeta 1 (FEZ1) as a
protein that interacted with JCV agnoprotein in a yeast two-hybrid screen of a
human brain cDNA library. An in vitro binding assay showed that agnoprotein
interacted directly with FEZ1 and microtubules. A microtubule cosedimentation
assay revealed that FEZ1 also associates with microtubules and that agnoprotein
induces the dissociation of FEZ1 from microtubules. Agnoprotein inhibited the
promotion by FEZ1 of neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells. Conversely, overexpression 
of FEZ1 suppressed JCV protein expression and intracellular trafficking in
JCV-infected cells. These results suggest that FEZ1 promotes neurite extension
through its interaction with microtubules, and that agnoprotein facilitates JCV
propagation by inducing the dissociation of FEZ1 from microtubules.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M411499200 
PMID: 15843383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

