
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 19;280(33):29804-11. Epub 2005 Jun 21.

The homeobox protein MSX2 interacts with tax oncoproteins and represses their
transactivation activity.

Twizere JC(1), Lef√®bvre L, Collete D, Debacq C, Urbain P, Heremans H, Jauniaux
JC, Burny A, Willems L, Kettmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agronomy, Gembloux, Belgium.

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) tax is an essential gene involved in the
transcriptional activation of viral expression. Tax is also believed to be
implicated in leukemogenesis because of its ability to immortalize primary cells 
in vitro. To gain insight into the molecular pathways mediating the activities of
this important gene, we identified cellular proteins interacting with Tax. By
means of a two-hybrid approach, we show that Tax specifically interacts with
MSX2, a general repressor of gene expression. GST pull-down experiments and
co-immunoprecipitation assays further confirmed binding specificity. Furthermore,
the N-terminal residues 1-79 of MSX2 are required for binding, whereas the
C-terminal residues 201-267 of MSX2 do not play a critical role. Whereas the
oncogenic potential of Tax in primary cells was only slightly affected by
overexpression of MSX2, the other function of Tax, namely LTR-dependent
transcriptional activation, was inhibited by MSX2 in human HeLa and bovine
B-lymphoblastoid (BL3) cell lines. This MSX2 repression function can be
counteracted by overexpression of transcription factors CREB2 and RAP74. The
Tax/MSX2 interplay thus results in repression of viral transcriptional activation
possibly acting as a regulatory feedback loop. Importantly, this viral gene
silencing is not strictly associated with a concomitant loss of Tax oncogenicity 
as measured by its ability to immortalize primary cells. And interestingly, MSX2 
also interacts with and inhibits the transactivation function of the related Tax1
protein encoded by the Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1).

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M503674200 
PMID: 15970589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

