
1. Oncogene. 2005 Sep 8;24(40):6119-32.

Hepatitis C virus core variants isolated from liver tumor but not from adjacent
non-tumor tissue interact with Smad3 and inhibit the TGF-beta pathway.

Pavio N(1), Battaglia S, Boucreux D, Arnulf B, Sobesky R, Hermine O, Brechot C.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U370, Paris V University, Pasteur Institute, 156 rue de Vaugirard 75730
Paris cedex 15, France. pavio@necker.fr

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major risk factor for human hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) but the mechanisms underlying HCV-induced carcinogenesis are still poorly
understood. We have hypothesized that viral variants, selected during long-term
infection, might contribute to cellular transformation. To address this issue, we
have investigated the effect of natural HCV core variants isolated from liver
tumors (T), or their non-tumor (NT) counterparts, on the tumor growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta) pathway, a major regulator of cellular proliferation, differentiation 
and apoptosis. We have found a significant reduction in TGF-beta reporter gene
activity with the expression of core sequences isolated from liver tumors. In
contrast, moderate or no effects were observed with non-tumor mutants or a core
reference sequence. The molecular mechanisms have been characterized and involved
the inhibition, by tumor-derived cores, of the DNA-binding activity of the
Smad3/4 transcription factors complex. This inhibition occurs through a direct
interaction between the central domain (amino acids 59-126) of tumor-derived core
and the MH1 DNA-binding domain of Smad3, thus preventing its binding to DNA. We
have therefore identified a new cell-signaling pathway targeted by HCV core and
inhibited by tumor-derived core sequences. These results suggest that during
chronic infection, there is selection of viral variants that may promote cell
transformation by providing, to clonally expanding cells, resistance to TGF-beta 
antiproliferative effects.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208749 
PMID: 16007207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

