
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 4;280(44):36935-45. Epub 2005 Aug 29.

Interaction of the Epstein-Barr virus mRNA export factor EB2 with human Spen
proteins SHARP, OTT1, and a novel member of the family, OTT3, links Spen proteins
with splicing regulation and mRNA export.

Hiriart E(1), Gruffat H, Buisson M, Mikaelian I, Keppler S, Meresse P, Mercher T,
Bernard OA, Sergeant A, Manet E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U412, ENS-Lyon, IFR 128 Biosciences Lyon Gerland, Laboratoire de
Virologie Humaine, 46 All√©e d'Italie, 69364 Lyon, France.

The Epstein-Barr virus early protein EB2 (also called BMLF1, Mta, or SM), a
protein absolutely required for the production of infectious virions, shares
properties with mRNA export factors. By using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we have 
identified the human protein OTT3 as an EB2-interacting factor. OTT3 is a new
member of the Spen (split end) family of proteins (huSHARP, huOTT1, DmSpen, and
muMINT), which are characterized by several N-terminal RNA recognition motifs and
a highly conserved C-terminal SPOC (Spen Paralog and Ortholog C-terminal) domain 
that, in the case of SHARP, has been shown to interact with SMRT/NCoR
corepressors. OTT3 is ubiquitously expressed as a 120-kDa protein. Transfected
OTT3 is a nonshuttling nuclear protein that co-localizes with co-transfected EB2.
We also showed that EB2 interacts with the SPOC domains of both OTT1 and SHARP
proteins. Although the OTT3 interaction domain maps within the 40 N-terminal
amino acids of EB2, OTT1 and SHARP interact within the C-terminal half of the
protein. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the capacity of the OTT3 and OTT1 SPOC
domains to interact with SMRT and repress transcription is far weaker than that
of SHARP. Thus there is no evidence for a role of OTT3 in transcriptional
regulation. Most interestingly, however, we have found that OTT3 has a role in
splicing regulation; OTT3 represses accumulation of the alternatively spliced
beta-thalassemia mRNAs, but it has no effect on the beta-globin constitutively
spliced mRNA. Thus our results suggested a new function for Spen proteins related
to mRNA export and splicing.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M501725200 
PMID: 16129689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

