
1. J Virol. 2005 Sep;79(18):11824-36.

Inhibition of ubiquitination and stabilization of human ubiquitin E3 ligase PIRH2
by measles virus phosphoprotein.

Chen M(1), Cortay JC, Logan IR, Sapountzi V, Robson CN, Gerlier D.

Author information: 
(1)Immunit√© & Infections Virales, CNRS--Univ-Lyon 1 UMR 5537, IFR Laennec, 69372 
Lyon Cedex 08, France.

Using a C-terminal domain (PCT) of the measles virus (MV) phosphoprotein (P
protein) as bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen, a cDNA identical to the recently
described human p53-induced-RING-H2 (hPIRH2) cDNA was isolated. A glutathione
S-transferase-hPIRH2 fusion protein expressed in bacteria was able to pull down P
protein when mixed with an extract from P-expressing HeLa cells in vitro, and
myc-tagged hPIRH2 could be reciprocally co-immunoprecipitated with MV P protein
from human cells. Additionally, immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that
hPIRH2-myc, MV P, and nucleocapsid (N) proteins form a ternary complex. The
hPIRH2 binding site was mapped to the C-terminal X domain region of the P protein
by using a yeast two-hybrid assay. The PCT binding site was mapped on hPIRH2 by
using a novel yeast two-hybrid tagged PCR approach and by co-immunoprecipitation 
of hPIRH2 cysteine mutants and mouse/human PIRH2 chimeras. The hPIRH2 C terminus 
could mediate the interaction with MV P which was favored by the RING-H2 motif.
When coexpressed with an enhanced green fluorescent protein-tagged hPIRH2
protein, MV P alone or in a complex with MV N was able to redistribute hPIRH2 to 
outside the nucleus, within intracellular aggregates. Finally, MV P efficiently
stabilized hPIRH2-myc expression and prevented its ubiquitination in vivo but had
no effect on the stability or ubiquitination of an alternative ubiquitin E3
ligase, Mdm2. Thus, MV P protein is the first protein from a pathogen that is
able to specifically interact with and stabilize the ubiquitin E3 ligase hPIRH2
by preventing its ubiquitination.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.18.11824-11836.2005 
PMCID: PMC1212616
PMID: 16140759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

