
1. Oncogene. 2006 Jan 19;25(3):438-47.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax attenuates gamma-irradiation-induced
apoptosis through physical interaction with Chk2.

Park HU(1), Jeong SJ, Jeong JH, Chung JH, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Checkpoint kinase 2 (Chk2) is known to mediate diverse cellular responses to
genotoxic stress. The fundamental role of Chk2 is to regulate the network of
genome-surveillance pathways that coordinate cell-cycle progression with DNA
repair and cell survival or death. Defects in Chk2 contribute to the development 
of both hereditary and sporadic human cancers. We now present evidence that the
human T-cell leukemia virus type-1 (HTLV-1) Tax protein directly interacts with
Chk2 and the kinase activity of Chk2 is inhibited by Tax. The physical
interaction of Chk2 and Tax was observed by co-immunoprecipitation assays in
HTLV-1-infected T cells (C81) as well as GST pull-down assays using purified
proteins. Binding and kinase activity inhibition studies with Tax deletion
mutants indicated that at least two domains of Tax mediate the interaction with
Chk2. We have analysed the functional consequence of de novo expression of Tax
upon the cellular DNA-damage-induced apoptosis, which is mediated by Chk2. Using 
transient transfection and TUNEL assay, we found that gamma-irradiation-induced
apoptosis was decreased in 293T and HCT-116 (p53(-/-)) cells expressing HTLV-1
Tax. Our studies demonstrate an important potential target of Tax in cellular
transformation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209059 
PMID: 16158050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

