
1. Virology. 2006 Feb 5;345(1):290-8. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

The human papillomavirus type 11 E1--E4 protein is a transglutaminase 3 substrate
and induces abnormalities of the cornified cell envelope.

Brown DR(1), Kitchin D, Qadadri B, Neptune N, Batteiger T, Ermel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN 46077, USA. darbrown@iupui.edu

The human papillomavirus (HPV) E1--E4 protein is detected in the cytoplasm of
differentiated keratinocytes, near the cornified cell envelope. HPV does not
induce lysis of the infected keratinocyte, and the normally durable cornified
cell envelope that forms during keratinocyte differentiation would seemingly
inhibit viral egress. HPV infection induces abnormalities of the cornified cell
envelope, but the exact mechanisms involved are not well understood. We tested
whether the HPV 11 E1--E4 protein, which co-localizes the cell envelope and
co-purifies with cell envelope fragments, could serve as an in vitro substrate
for transglutaminases. We found evidence of E1--E4 cross-linking by endogenous
transglutaminases in an in situ assay using frozen sections of human foreskin,
and in addition, E1--E4 protein was cross-linked by recombinant transglutaminase 
3 (but not transglutaminase 1) in an in vitro cross-linking assay. We also tested
whether expression of E1--E4 in differentiated keratinocytes would induce
morphologic alterations of cornified cell envelopes. Differentiated keratinocytes
expressing E1--E4 were disorganized and pleomorphic compared to control cells,
and cell envelopes purified from E1--E4-expressing cells were small, fragmented, 
and rough bordered compared to the round, smooth bordered cell envelopes from
control cells. We conclude from these in vitro experiments that the E1--E4
protein is cross-linked by transglutaminase 3, and that E1--E4 expression in
differentiated keratinocytes induces morphologic abnormalities of the cornified
cell envelope.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2005.09.048 
PMID: 16257432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

