
1. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 1;65(23):10830-7.

Hepatitis C virus core protein inhibits tumor suppressor protein promyelocytic
leukemia function in human hepatoma cells.

Herzer K(1), Weyer S, Krammer PH, Galle PR, Hofmann TG.

Author information: 
(1)I. Medical Department, Johannes Gutenberg Universit√§t, Mainz, Germany.

Tumor suppressor protein promyelocytic leukemia (PML) is implicated in apoptosis 
regulation and antiviral response. PML localizes predominantly to PML-nuclear
bodies (PML-NB), nuclear macromolecular complexes regulating tumor suppressor
protein p53 activity. Consistent with the function of PML in the cellular
antiviral response, PML-NBs represent preferential targets in viral infections.
In the case of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, important characteristics are
nonresponsiveness to IFN therapy and development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
However, the mechanisms which lead to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma
are largely unknown. Here, we show that HCV core protein localizes to the cell
nucleus in PML-NBs, where it colocalizes with p53. The HCV core interacts with
endogenously expressed PML isoform IV (PML-IV), a key regulator of p53 activity. 
Importantly, we show that HCV core protein inhibits PML-IV-induced apoptosis and 
interferes with the coactivator function of PML-IV for proapoptotic p53 target
genes including CD95 (Fas/APO-1). In particular, we found that the HCV core
inhibits p53-mediated target gene expression by predominantly targeting the
coactivator function of PML-IV because HCV core-mediated p53 target gene
repression was absent in PML-ablated cells. HCV core expression abrogated both
p53 serine 15 phosphorylation and lysine 382 acetylation, two p53-activating
posttranslational modifications which were previously linked to an increased
PML-NB formation. Taken together, our results suggest a potential mechanism for
HCV-associated development of hepatocellular carcinoma through HCV core-mediated 
inactivation of the PML tumor suppressor pathway.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-0880 
PMID: 16322229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

