
1. J Virol. 2006 Jan;80(1):342-52.

Interaction of moloney murine leukemia virus capsid with Ubc9 and PIASy mediates 
SUMO-1 addition required early in infection.

Yueh A(1), Leung J, Bhattacharyya S, Perrone LA, de los Santos K, Pu SY, Goff SP.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Yeast two-hybrid screens led to the identification of Ubc9 and PIASy, the E2 and 
E3 small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-conjugating enzymes, as proteins
interacting with the capsid (CA) protein of the Moloney murine leukemia virus.
The binding site in CA for Ubc9 was mapped by deletion and alanine-scanning
mutagenesis to a consensus motif for SUMOylation at residues 202 to 220, and the 
binding site for PIASy was mapped to residues 114 to 176, directly centered on
the major homology region. Expression of CA and a tagged SUMO-1 protein resulted 
in covalent transfer of SUMO-1 to CA in vivo. Mutations of lysine residues to
arginines near the Ubc9 binding site and mutations at the PIASy binding site
reduced or eliminated CA SUMOylation. Introduction of these mutations into the
complete viral genome blocked virus replication. The mutants exhibited no defects
in the late stages of viral gene expression or virion assembly. Upon infection,
the mutant viruses were able to carry out reverse transcription to synthesize
normal levels of linear viral DNA but were unable to produce the circular viral
DNAs or integrated provirus normally found in the nucleus. The results suggest
that the SUMOylation of CA mediated by an interaction with Ubc9 and PIASy is
required for early events of infection, after reverse transcription and before
nuclear entry and viral DNA integration.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.1.342-352.2006 
PMCID: PMC1317516
PMID: 16352559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

