
1. Retrovirology. 2006 Jan 13;3:5.

SUV39H1 interacts with HTLV-1 Tax and abrogates Tax transactivation of HTLV-1
LTR.

Kamoi K(1), Yamamoto K, Misawa A, Miyake A, Ishida T, Tanaka Y, Mochizuki M,
Watanabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genome Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
koju1030@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Tax is the oncoprotein of HTLV-1 which deregulates signal
transduction pathways, transcription of genes and cell cycle regulation of host
cells. Transacting function of Tax is mainly mediated by its protein-protein
interactions with host cellular factors. As to Tax-mediated regulation of gene
expression of HTLV-1 and cellular genes, Tax was shown to regulate histone
acetylation through its physical interaction with histone acetylases and
deacetylases. However, functional interaction of Tax with histone
methyltransferases (HMTase) has not been studied. Here we examined the ability of
Tax to interact with a histone methyltransferase SUV39H1 that methylates histone 
H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and represses transcription of genes, and studied the
functional effects of the interaction on HTLV-1 gene expression.
RESULTS: Tax was shown to interact with SUV39H1 in vitro, and the interaction is 
largely dependent on the C-terminal half of SUV39H1 containing the SET domain.
Tax does not affect the methyltransferase activity of SUV39H1 but tethers SUV39H1
to a Tax containing complex in the nuclei. In reporter gene assays, co-expression
of SUV39H1 represses Tax transactivation of HTLV-1 LTR promoter activity, which
was dependent on the methyltransferase activity of SUV39H1. Furthermore, SUV39H1 
expression is induced along with Tax in JPX9 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) analysis shows localization of SUV39H1 on the LTR after Tax induction, but
not in the absence of Tax induction, in JPX9 transformants retaining HTLV-1-Luc
plasmid. Immunoblotting shows higher levels of SUV39H1 expression in HTLV-1
transformed and latently infected cell lines.
CONCLUSION: Our study revealed for the first time the interaction between Tax and
SUV39H1 and apparent tethering of SUV39H1 by Tax to the HTLV-1 LTR. It is
speculated that Tax-mediated tethering of SUV39H1 to the LTR and induction of the
repressive histone modification on the chromatin through H3 K9 methylation may be
the basis for the dose-dependent repression of Tax transactivation of LTR by
SUV39H1. Tax-induced SUV39H1 expression, Tax-SUV39H1 interaction and tethering to
the LTR may provide a support for an idea that the above sequence of events may
form a negative feedback loop that self-limits HTLV-1 viral gene expression in
infected cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-3-5 
PMCID: PMC1363732
PMID: 16409643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

