
1. Virology. 2006 Jul 5;350(2):302-11. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

Interactions of the cellular CCAAT displacement protein and human papillomavirus 
E2 protein with the viral origin of replication can regulate DNA replication.

Narahari J(1), Fisk JC, Melendy T, Roman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine and Walther Cancer Institute, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
jnarahar@iupui.edu

Previously, we and others have shown that CCAAT displacement protein (CDP)
negatively regulates the papillomavirus promoters. Overexpression of CDP has been
shown to inhibit high-risk human papillomavirus virus (HPV) and bovine
papillomavirus DNA replication in vivo presumably through reduction in expression
of viral replication proteins, E1 and E2. Sequence analysis of the HPV origin
indicates several potential CDP-binding sites with one site overlapping the
E1-binding site. Therefore, CDP could also negatively regulate papillomavirus
replication directly by preventing the loading of the initiation complex. We show
here that purified CDP inhibits in vitro HPV DNA replication. Footprint analysis 
demonstrated that CDP binds the E1-binding site and the TATA box, and that the
binding of purified CDP to the E1-binding site is decreased by the addition of
purified E2 protein. Consistent with this, E2-independent in vitro HPV
replication is inhibited by CDP to a greater extent than E2-dependent
replication. These results suggest that binding of E2 at the E2-binding site may 
play an important role in overcoming the inhibition of E1 initiation complex
formation caused by the binding of negative regulators like CDP to the origin of 
replication.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2006.01.047 
PMID: 16529788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

