
1. EMBO J. 2006 Apr 19;25(8):1730-40. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Antiviral effect of the mammalian translation initiation factor 2alpha kinase
GCN2 against RNA viruses.

Berlanga JJ(1), Ventoso I, Harding HP, Deng J, Ron D, Sonenberg N, Carrasco L, de
Haro C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-UAM, Facultad de Ciencias,
Cantoblanco, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

In mammals, four different protein kinases, heme-regulated inhibitor,
double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR), general control
non-derepressible-2 (GCN2) and PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase, regulate
protein synthesis in response to environmental stresses by phosphorylating the
alpha-subunit of the initiation factor 2 (eIF2alpha). We now report that
mammalian GCN2 is specifically activated in vitro upon binding of two nonadjacent
regions of the Sindbis virus (SV) genomic RNA to its histidyl-tRNA
synthetase-related domain. Moreover, endogenous GCN2 is activated in cells upon
SV infection. Strikingly, fibroblasts derived from GCN2-/- mice possess an
increased permissiveness to SV or vesicular stomatitis virus infection. We
further show that mice lacking GCN2 are extremely susceptible to intranasal SV
infection, demonstrating high virus titers in the brain compared to similarly
infected control animals. The overexpression of wild-type GCN2, but not the
catalytically inactive GCN2-K618R variant, in NIH 3T3 cells impaired the
replication of a number of RNA viruses. We determined that GCN2 inhibits SV
replication by blocking early viral translation of genomic SV RNA. These findings
point to a hitherto unrecognized role of GCN2 as an early mediator in the
cellular response to RNA viruses.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601073 
PMCID: PMC1440839
PMID: 16601681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

