
1. Hear Res. 2006 May;215(1-2):1-9. Epub 2006 May 6.

The Coxsackievirus and Adenovirus Receptor: a new adhesion protein in cochlear
development.

Excoffon KJ(1), Avenarius MR, Hansen MR, Kimberling WJ, Najmabadi H, Smith RJ,
Zabner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, University of
Iowa, 440 EMRB, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

The Coxsackievirus and Adenovirus Receptor (CAR) is an essential regulator of
cell growth and adhesion during development. The gene for CAR, CXADR, is located 
within the genomic locus for Usher syndrome type 1E (USH1E). Based on this and a 
physical interaction with harmonin, the protein responsible for USH1C, we
hypothesized that CAR may be involved in cochlear development and that mutations 
in CXADR may be responsible for USH1E. The expression of CAR in the cochlea was
determined by PCR and immunofluorescence microscopy. We found that CAR expression
is highly regulated during development. In neonatal mice, CAR is localized to the
junctions of most cochlear cell types but is restricted to the supporting and
strial cells in adult cochlea. A screen of two populations consisting of
non-syndromic deaf and Usher 1 patients for mutations in CXADR revealed one
haploid mutation (P356S). Cell surface expression, viral receptor activity, and
localization of the mutant form of CAR were indistinguishable from wild-type CAR.
Although we were unable to confirm a role for CAR in autosomal recessive,
non-syndromic deafness, or Usher syndrome type 1, based on its regulation,
localization, and molecular interactions, CAR remains an attractive candidate for
genetic deafness.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2006.02.009 
PMID: 16678988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

