
1. J Gen Virol. 2006 Jul;87(Pt 7):1883-91.

Negative regulation of hepatitis B virus replication by cellular Hsp40/DnaJ
proteins through destabilization of viral core and X proteins.

Sohn SY(1), Kim SB, Kim J, Ahn BY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Anamdong 5-1,
Sungbuk, Seoul 136-701, Korea.

The hepatitis B virus core protein consists of an amino-terminal capsid-assembly 
domain and a carboxyl-terminal RNA-binding domain. By using the yeast two-hybrid 
system, two Hsp40/DnaJ chaperone-family proteins, Hdj1 and hTid1, that interact
with the carboxyl-terminal region (aa 94-185) of the core protein were
identified. Hdj1 is the prototype member of the family and hTid1 is the human
homologue of the Drosophila tumour-suppressor protein Tid56. Binding of the viral
core protein with the Hsp40 proteins was confirmed by affinity chromatography and
immunoprecipitation of transiently expressed proteins. Moreover, in a sucrose
gradient, the precursor form of hTid1 co-sedimented with capsid-like particles
composed of the full-length core protein. Unlike the general perception of the
role of the cellular chaperone proteins in assisting viral protein folding and
thus enhancing virus replication, ectopic expression of Hdj1 and hTid1 suppressed
replication of HBV in transfected human hepatoma cells. Conversely, RNA
interference-mediated knock-down of hTid1 resulted in increased HBV replication. 
It was found that both Hsp40 proteins specifically accelerated degradation of the
viral core and HBx proteins. Our results suggest that the cellular chaperones,
through destabilization of viral proteins, exert inhibitory functions on virus
replication and hence may play suppressive roles in hepatocellular carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.81684-0 
PMID: 16760390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

