
1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2006 Jul;26(7):455-61.

The human papillomavirus type 16 E7 protein binds human interferon regulatory
factor-9 via a novel PEST domain required for transformation.

Antonsson A(1), Payne E, Hengst K, McMillan NA.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Programme, Centre for Immunology and Cancer Research,
University of Queensland, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland 4102,
Australia.

It is critical that viruses are able to avoid the antiviral activities of
interferon (IFN). We have shown previously that the human papillomavirus (HPV) is
able to avoid IFN-alpha via interaction of the HPV-16 E7 protein with IFN
regulatory factor-9 (IRF-9). Here, we investigated the details of the interaction
using HPV-16 E7 peptide mapping to show that IRF-9 binds HPV-16 E7 in a domain
encompassing amino acids 25-36. A closer examination of this region indicates
this is a novel proline, glutamate, serine, and threonine-rich (PEST) domain,
with a PEST score of 8.74. We have also mapped the region of interaction within
IRF-9 and found that amino acids 354-393 play an important role in binding to
HPV-16 E7. This region of IRF-9 encompasses the IRF association domain (IAD), a
region important for protein-protein interaction central to IRF function.
Finally, we used alanine-scanning mutagenesis to determine if E7-IRF-9
interaction was important for E7-mediated cellular transformation and found that 
the HPV-16 E7 mutants Y25A, E26A, S31A, S32A, and E35A, but not L28A and N29A,
caused loss of transformation ability. Preliminary data suggest loss of IRF-9
interaction with E7 mutants correlated with transformation. Our work suggests
E7-IRF-9 interaction is important for the transforming ability of HPV-16 E7 and
that HPV-16 E7 may interact with other IRF proteins that have IAD domains.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.2006.26.455 
PMID: 16800784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

