
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 6;281(40):30166-74. Epub 2006 Aug 1.

Jab1 mediates cytoplasmic localization and degradation of West Nile virus capsid 
protein.

Oh W(1), Yang MR, Lee EW, Park KM, Pyo S, Yang JS, Lee HW, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon
440-746, Republic of Korea.

The clinical manifestations of West Nile virus (WNV), a member of the Flavivirus 
family, include febrile illness, sporadic encephalitis, and paralysis. The capsid
(Cp) of WNV is thought to participate in these processes by inducing apoptosis
through mitochondrial dysfunction and activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3. To
further identify the molecular mechanism of the WNV capsid protein (WNVCp), yeast
two-hybrid assays were employed using WNV-Cp as bait. Jab1, the fifth subunit of 
the COP9 signalosome, was subsequently identified as a molecule that interacts
with WNVCp. Immunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pulldown assays
confirmed that direct interaction could occur between WNVCp and Jab1.
Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated that the overexpressed WNVCp, which
localized to the nucleolus, was translocated to the cytoplasm upon its
co-expression with Jab1. When treated with leptomycin B, Jab1-facilitated nuclear
exclusion of WNVCp was prevented, which indicated that the CRM1 complex is
required for Jab1-facilitated nuclear export of WNVCp. Moreover, Jab1 promoted
the degradation of WNVCp in a proteasome-dependent way. Consistent with this,
WNVCp-mediated cell cycle arrest at the G(2) phase in H1299 was prevented by
exogenous Jab1. Finally, an analysis of WNVCp deletion mutants indicated that the
first 15 amino acids were required for interaction with Jab1. Furthermore, the
double-point mutant of the WNVCp, P5A/P8A, was incapable of binding to Jab1.
These results indicate that Jab1 has a potential protective effect against
pathogenic WNVCp and might provide a novel target site for the treatment of
disease caused by WNV.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M602651200 
PMID: 16882664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

