
1. J Virol. 2006 Sep;80(18):8951-60.

DC-SIGN and CLEC-2 mediate human immunodeficiency virus type 1 capture by
platelets.

Chaipan C(1), Soilleux EJ, Simpson P, Hofmann H, Gramberg T, Marzi A, Geier M,
Stewart EA, Eisemann J, Steinkasserer A, Suzuki-Inoue K, Fuller GL, Pearce AC,
Watson SP, Hoxie JA, Baribaud F, Pöhlmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, University Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Glückstrasse 6, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Platelets can engulf human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), and a
significant amount of HIV-1 in the blood of infected individuals is associated
with these cells. However, it is unclear how platelets capture HIV-1 and whether 
platelet-associated virus remains infectious. DC-SIGN and other lectins
contribute to capture of HIV-1 by dendritic cells (DCs) and facilitate HIV-1
spread in DC/T-cell cocultures. Here, we show that platelets express both the
C-type lectin-like receptor 2 (CLEC-2) and low levels of DC-SIGN. CLEC-2 bound to
HIV-1, irrespective of the presence of the viral envelope protein, and
facilitated HIV-1 capture by platelets. However, a substantial fraction of the
HIV-1 binding activity of platelets was dependent on DC-SIGN. A combination of
DC-SIGN and CLEC-2 inhibitors strongly reduced HIV-1 association with platelets, 
indicating that these lectins are required for efficient HIV-1 binding to
platelets. Captured HIV-1 was maintained in an infectious state over several
days, suggesting that HIV-1 can escape degradation by platelets and might use
these cells to promote its spread. Our results identify CLEC-2 as a novel HIV-1
attachment factor and provide evidence that platelets capture and transfer
infectious HIV-1 via DC-SIGN and CLEC-2, thereby possibly facilitating HIV-1
dissemination in infected patients.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00136-06 
PMCID: PMC1563896
PMID: 16940507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

