
1. Virol J. 2006 Nov 24;3:99.

The role of crude human saliva and purified salivary MUC5B and MUC7 mucins in the
inhibition of Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1 in an inhibition assay.

Habte HH(1), Mall AS, de Beer C, Lotz ZE, Kahn D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
hhabte@uctgsh1.uct.ac.za

BACKGROUND: Despite the continuous shedding of HIV infected blood into the oral
cavity and the detectable presence of the AIDS virus at a high frequency, human
saliva is reported to inhibit oral transmission of HIV through kissing, dental
treatment, biting, and aerosolization. The purpose of this study was to purify
salivary MUC5B and MUC7 mucins from crude saliva and determine their anti-HIV-1
activities.
METHODS: Following Sepharose CL-4B column chromatography and caesium chloride
isopycnic density-gradient ultra-centrifugation, the purity and identity of the
mucins was determined by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting analysis respectively.
Subsequently an HIV-1 inhibition assay was carried out to determine the
anti-HIV-1 activity of the crude saliva and purified salivary mucins by
incubating them with subtype D HIV-1 prior to infection of the CD4+ CEM SS cells.
RESULTS: Western blotting analysis confirmed that the mucin in the void volume is
MUC5B and the mucin in the included volume is MUC7. The HIV inhibition assay
revealed that both the crude saliva and salivary MUC5B and MUC7 mucins inhibited 
HIV-1 activity by 100%.
CONCLUSION: Although the mechanism of action is not clear the carbohydrate
moieties of the salivary mucins may trap or aggregate the virus and prevent host 
cell entry.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-3-99 
PMCID: PMC1676003
PMID: 17125499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

