
1. J Virol. 2007 Mar;81(6):2923-9. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

The MyD116 African swine fever virus homologue interacts with the catalytic
subunit of protein phosphatase 1 and activates its phosphatase activity.

Rivera J(1), Abrams C, Hernáez B, Alcázar A, Escribano JM, Dixon L, Alonso C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biotecnología, INIA, Ctra. La Coruña km 7.5, 28040 Madrid,
Spain.

The DP71L protein of African swine fever virus (ASFV) shares sequence similarity 
with the herpes simplex virus ICP34.5 protein over a C-terminal domain. We showed
that the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) interacts specifically 
with the ASFV DP71L protein in a yeast two-hybrid screen. The chimeric
full-length DP71L protein, from ASFV strain Badajoz 71 (BA71V), fused to
glutathione S-transferase (DP71L-GST) was expressed in Escherichia coli and shown
to bind specifically to the PP1-alpha catalytic subunit expressed as a histidine 
fusion protein (6xHis-PP1alpha) in E. coli. The functional effects of this
interaction were investigated by measuring the levels of PP1 and PP2A in
ASFV-infected Vero cells. This showed that infection with wild-type ASFV strain
BA71V activated PP1 between two- and threefold over that of mock-infected cells. 
This activation did not occur in cells infected with the BA71V isolate in which
the DP71L gene had been deleted, suggesting that expression of DP71L leads to PP1
activation. In contrast, no effect was observed on the activity of PP2A following
ASFV infection. We showed that infection of cells with wild-type BA71V virus
resulted in decreased phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of eukaryotic
initiation factor 2 (eIF-2alpha). ICP34.5 recruits PP1 to dephosphorylate the
alpha subunit of eukaryotic translational initiation factor 2 (also known as
eIF-2alpha); possibly the ASFV DP71L protein has a similar function.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02077-06 
PMCID: PMC1865990
PMID: 17215279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

