
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 23;104(4):1289-94. Epub 2007 Jan 17.

DEC-205 receptor on dendritic cells mediates presentation of HIV gag protein to
CD8+ T cells in a spectrum of human MHC I haplotypes.

Bozzacco L(1), Trumpfheller C, Siegal FP, Mehandru S, Markowitz M, Carrington M, 
Nussenzweig MC, Piperno AG, Steinman RM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Cellular Physiology and Immunology, Chris Browne Center for
Immunology and Immune Diseases, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021,
USA.

Optimal HIV vaccines should elicit CD8+ T cells specific for HIV proteins
presented on MHC class I products, because these T cells contribute to host
resistance to viruses. We had previously found that the targeting of antigen to
dendritic cells (DCs) in mice efficiently induces CD8+ T cell responses. To
extend this finding to humans, we introduced the HIV p24 gag protein into a mAb
that targets DEC-205/CD205, an endocytic receptor of DCs. We then assessed
cross-presentation, which is the processing of nonreplicating internalized
antigen onto MHC class I for recognition by CD8+ T cells. Low doses of
alphaDEC-gag, but not control Ig-gag, stimulated proliferation and IFN-gamma
production by CD8+ T cells isolated from the blood of HIV-infected donors.
alphaCD205 fusion mAb was more effective for cross-presentation than
alphaCD209/DC-SIGN, another abundant DC uptake receptor. Presentation was
diverse, because we identified eight different gag peptides that were recognized 
via DEC-205 in 11 individuals studied consecutively. Our results, based on humans
with highly polymorphic MHC products, reveal that DCs and DEC-205 can
cross-present several different peptides from a single protein. Because of the
consistency in eliciting CD8+ T cell responses, these data support the testing of
alphaDEC-205 fusion mAb as a protein-based vaccine.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0610383104 
PMCID: PMC1783096
PMID: 17229838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

