
1. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 4;282(18):13456-67. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

Interaction of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 integrase with cellular
nuclear import receptor importin 7 and its impact on viral replication.

Ao Z(1), Huang G, Yao H, Xu Z, Labine M, Cochrane AW, Yao X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Human Retrovirology, Department of Medical
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
R3E 0W3.

Similar to all other viruses, human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) depends
heavily on cellular factors for its successful replication. In this study we have
investigated the interaction of HIV-1 integrase (IN) with several host nuclear
import factors using co-immunoprecipitation assays. Our results indicate that IN 
interacts specifically with host importin 7 (Imp7) in vivo, but does not interact
with importin 8 (Imp8) or importin alpha (Rch1). In contrast, another HIV-1
karyophilic protein MAp17, which is capable of binding Rch1, fails to interact
with Imp7, suggesting that IN and Map17 may interact with different cellular
pathways during HIV-1 replication. Genetic analysis revealed that the C-terminal 
domain of IN is the region responsible for interaction between IN with Imp7, and 
an IN mutant (K240A,K244A/R263A,K264A) disrupted the Imp7 binding ability of the 
protein, indicating that both regions ((235)WKGPAKLLWKG and (262)RRKAK) within
the C-terminal domain of IN are required for efficient IN/Imp7 interaction. Using
a vesicular stomatitis virus G glycoprotein pseudotyped HIV single-cycle
replication system, we showed that the IN/Imp7 interaction-deficient mutant was
unable to mediate viral replication and displayed impairment at both viral
reverse transcription and nuclear import steps. Moreover, transient knockdown of 
Imp7 in both HIV-1 producing and target cells resulted in a 2.5-3.5-fold
inhibition of HIV infection. Altogether, our results indicate that HIV-1 IN
specifically interacts with Imp7, and this viral/cellular protein interaction
contributes to efficient HIV-1 infection.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M610546200 
PMID: 17360709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

