
1. J Virol. 2007 Aug;81(15):7974-84. Epub 2007 May 16.

Distance-dependent processing of adeno-associated virus type 5 RNA is controlled 
by 5' exon definition.

Qiu J(1), Cheng F, Pintel D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Missouri--Columbia, School of Medicine, Life Sciences Center, Columbia, Missouri 
65212, USA.

Adeno-associated virus type 5 (AAV5) is unique among human AAV serotypes in that 
it uses a polyadenylation site [(pA)p] within the single small intron in the
center of the genome. We previously reported that inhibition of polyadenylation
at (pA)p, necessary for read-through of P41-generated capsid gene pre-mRNAs which
are subsequently spliced, requires binding of U1 snRNP to the upstream donor.
Inhibition was reduced as the distance between the cap site and the donor was
increased (increasing the size of the 5' exon). Here, we have demonstrated that
U1-70K is a key component of U1 snRNP that mediates inhibition of polyadenylation
at (pA)p. Furthermore, introduction of a U-rich stretch, predicted to target
TIA-1 and thus increase the affinity of U1 snRNP binding to the intervening donor
site, significantly augmented inhibition of (pA)p, while depletion of TIA-1 by
siRNA increased (pA)p read-through. Finally, artificially tethering the cap
binding complex (CBC) components CBP80 and CBP20 upstream of the intron donor
increased inhibition of polyadenylation at (pA)p. Our results suggest that
interaction with the CBC strengthens U1 snRNP binding to the downstream intron
donor in a manner inversely proportional to the size of the 5' exon, thus
governing the competition between intron splicing and polyadenylation at (pA)p.
This competition must be optimized to program both the levels of polyadenylation 
of P7- and P19-generated RNA at (pA)p required to produce proper levels of the
essential Rep proteins and the splicing of P41-generated RNAs to produce the
proper ratio of capsid proteins during AAV5 infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00714-07 
PMCID: PMC1951275
PMID: 17507471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

