
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jul 31;104(31):12884-9. Epub 2007 Jul 6.

Cellular cofactors affecting hepatitis C virus infection and replication.

Randall G(1), Panis M, Cooper JD, Tellinghuisen TL, Sukhodolets KE, Pfeffer S,
Landthaler M, Landgraf P, Kan S, Lindenbach BD, Chien M, Weir DB, Russo JJ, Ju J,
Brownstein MJ, Sheridan R, Sander C, Zavolan M, Tuschl T, Rice CM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, Center for the Study of
Hepatitis C, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of RNA Molecular
Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 14;104(33):13215-6.
    J Hepatol. 2008 Mar;48(3):523-5.

Recently identified hepatitis C virus (HCV) isolates that are infectious in cell 
culture provide a genetic system to evaluate the significance of virus-host
interactions for HCV replication. We have completed a systematic RNAi screen
wherein siRNAs were designed that target 62 host genes encoding proteins that
physically interact with HCV RNA or proteins or belong to cellular pathways
thought to modulate HCV infection. This includes 10 host proteins that we
identify in this study to bind HCV NS5A. siRNAs that target 26 of these host
genes alter infectious HCV production >3-fold. Included in this set of 26 were
siRNAs that target Dicer, a principal component of the RNAi silencing pathway.
Contrary to the hypothesis that RNAi is an antiviral pathway in mammals, as has
been reported for subgenomic HCV replicons, siRNAs that target Dicer inhibited
HCV replication. Furthermore, siRNAs that target several other components of the 
RNAi pathway also inhibit HCV replication. MicroRNA profiling of human liver,
human hepatoma Huh-7.5 cells, and Huh-7.5 cells that harbor replicating HCV
demonstrated that miR-122 is the predominant microRNA in each environment.
miR-122 has been previously implicated in positively regulating the replication
of HCV genotype 1 replicons. We find that 2'-O-methyl antisense oligonucleotide
depletion of miR-122 also inhibits HCV genotype 2a replication and infectious
virus production. Our data define 26 host genes that modulate HCV infection and
indicate that the requirement for functional RNAi for HCV replication is dominant
over any antiviral activity this pathway may exert against HCV.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0704894104 
PMCID: PMC1937561
PMID: 17616579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

