
1. J Mol Biol. 2007 Sep 14;372(2):317-30. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

The 73 kDa subunit of the CPSF complex binds to the HIV-1 LTR promoter and
functions as a negative regulatory factor that is inhibited by the HIV-1 Tat
protein.

de la Vega L(1), Sánchez-Duffhues G, Fresno M, Schmitz ML, Muñoz E, Calzado MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Fisiología e Inmunología, Universidad de
Córdoba, Facultad de Medicina, Avda de Menéndez Pidal s/n, 14004, Córdoba, Spain.

Gene expression in eukaryotes requires the post-transcriptional cleavage of mRNA 
precursors into mature mRNAs. The cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor
(CPSF) is critical for this process and its 73 kDa subunit (CPSF-73) mediates
cleavage coupled to polyadenylation and histone pre-mRNA processing. Using
CPSF-73 over-expression and siRNA-mediated knockdown experiments, this study
identifies CPSF-73 as an important regulatory protein that represses the basal
transcriptional activity of the HIV-1 LTR promoter. Similar results were found
with over-expression of the CPSF-73 homologue RC-68, but not with CPSF 100 kDa
subunit (CPSF-100) and RC-74. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed the
physical interaction of CPSF-73 with the HIV-1 LTR promoter. Further experiments 
revealed indirect CPSF-73 binding to the region between -275 to -110 within the
5' upstream region. Functional assays revealed the importance for the 5' upstream
region (-454 to -110) of the LTR for CPSF-73-mediated transcription repression.
We also show that HIV-1 Tat protein interacts with CPSF-73 and counteracts its
repressive activity on the HIV-1 LTR promoter. Our results clearly show a novel
function for CPSF-73 and add another candidate protein for explaining the
molecular mechanisms underlying HIV-1 latency.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.075 
PMID: 17669424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

