
1. J Virol. 2007 Nov;81(21):11900-7. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Cooperation of NF-kappaB2/p100 activation and the PDZ domain binding motif signal
in human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Tax1 but not HTLV-2 Tax2 is
crucial for interleukin-2-independent growth transformation of a T-cell line.

Higuchi M(1), Tsubata C, Kondo R, Yoshida S, Takahashi M, Oie M, Tanaka Y,
Mahieux R, Matsuoka M, Fujii M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, 1-757 Asahimachi-Dori, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.
mhiguchi@med.niigata-u.ac.jp

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) but not HTLV-2 is associated with
adult T-cell leukemia, and the distinct pathogenicity of these two closely
related viruses is thought to stem from the distinct biological functions of the 
respective transforming proteins, HTLV-1 Tax1 and HTLV-2 Tax2. In this study, we 
demonstrate that Tax1 but not Tax2 interacts with NF-kappaB2/p100 and activates
it by inducing the cleavage of p100 into the active transcription factor p52.
Using RNA interference methods, we further show that NF-kappaB2/p100 is required 
for the transformation induced by Tax1, as determined by the ability to convert a
T-cell line (CTLL-2) from interleukin-2 (IL-2)-dependent to -independent growth. 
While Tax2 shows a reduced transforming activity relative to Tax1, Tax2 fused
with a PDZ domain binding motif (PBM) present only in Tax1 shows transforming
activity equivalent to that of Tax1 in CTLL-2 cells expressing an inducer of p52 
processing. These results reveal that the activation of NF-kappaB2/p100 plays a
crucial role in the Tax1-mediated transformation of T cells and that
NF-kappaB2/p100 activation and PBM function are both responsible for the
augmented transforming activity of Tax1 relative to Tax2, thus suggesting that
these Tax1-specific functions play crucial roles in HTLV-1 leukemogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00532-07 
PMCID: PMC2168800
PMID: 17715223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

