
1. J Gen Virol. 2008 Jan;89(Pt 1):288-296. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.83412-0.

N-Myristoyltransferase isozymes exhibit differential specificity for human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Gag and Nef.

Seaton KE(1), Smith CD(2)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC, USA.

Myristoylation of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) proteins Gag
and Nef by N-myristoyltransferase (NMT) is a key process in retroviral
replication and virulence, yet remains incompletely characterized. Therefore, the
roles of the two isozymes, NMT1 and NMT2, in myristoylating Gag and Nef were
examined using biochemical and molecular approaches. Fluorescently labelled
peptides corresponding to the N terminus of HIV-1 Gag or Nef were myristoylated
by recombinant human NMT1 and NMT2. Kinetic analyses indicated that NMT1 and NMT2
had 30- and 130-fold lower K(m )values for Nef than Gag, respectively. Values for
K(cat) indicated that, once Gag or Nef binds to the enzyme, myristoylation by
NMT1 and NMT2 proceeds at comparable rates. Furthermore, the catalytic
efficiencies for the processing of Gag by NMT1 and NMT2 were equivalent. In
contrast, NMT2 had approximately 5-fold higher catalytic efficiency for the
myristoylation of Nef than NMT1. Competition experiments confirmed that the Nef
peptide acts as a competitive inhibitor for the myristoylation of Gag.
Experiments using full-length recombinant Nef protein also indicated a lower K(m)
for Nef myristoylation by NMT2 than NMT1. Small interfering RNAs were used to
selectively deplete NMT1 and/or NMT2 from HEK293T cells expressing a recombinant 
Nef-sgGFP fusion protein. Depletion of NMT1 had minimal effect on the
intracellular distribution of Nef-sgGFP, whereas depletion of NMT2 altered
distribution to a diffuse, widespread pattern, mimicking that of a
myristoylation-deficient mutant of Nef-sgGFP. Together, these findings indicate
that Nef is preferentially myristoylated by NMT2, suggesting that selective
inhibition of NMT2 may provide a novel means of blocking HIV virulence.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.83412-0 
PMCID: PMC2888270
PMID: 18089753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

