
1. J Virol. 2008 Mar;82(6):2631-41. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Human butyrate-induced transcript 1 interacts with hepatitis C virus NS5A and
regulates viral replication.

Taguwa S(1), Okamoto T, Abe T, Mori Y, Suzuki T, Moriishi K, Matsuura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A) is required for the
replication of the viral genome and is involved in several host signaling
pathways. To gain further insight into the functional role of NS5A in HCV
replication, we screened human cDNA libraries by a yeast two-hybrid system using 
NS5A as the bait and identified human butyrate-induced transcript 1 (hB-ind1) as 
a novel NS5A-binding protein. Endogenously and exogenously expressed hB-ind1 was 
coimmunoprecipitated with NS5A of various genotypes through the coiled-coil
domain of hB-ind1. The small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of
hB-ind1 in human hepatoma cell lines suppressed the replication of HCV RNA
replicons and the production of infectious particles of HCV genotype 2a strain
JFH1. Furthermore, these reductions were canceled by the expression of an
siRNA-resistant hB-ind1 mutant. Among the NS5A-binding host proteins involved in 
HCV replication, hB-ind1 exhibited binding with FKBP8, and hB-ind1 interacted
with Hsp90 through the FxxW motif in its N-terminal p23 homology domain. The
impairment of the replication of HCV RNA replicons and of the production of
infectious particles of JFH1 virus in the hB-ind1 knockdown cell lines was not
reversed by the expression of an siRNA-resistant hB-ind1 mutant in which the FxxW
motif was replaced by AxxA. These results suggest that hB-ind1 plays a crucial
role in HCV RNA replication and the propagation of JFH1 virus through interaction
with viral and host proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02153-07 
PMCID: PMC2259004
PMID: 18160438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

