
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jan 8;105(1):294-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0704831105. 
Epub 2008 Jan 2.

SOCS1 is an inducible host factor during HIV-1 infection and regulates the
intracellular trafficking and stability of HIV-1 Gag.

Ryo A(1), Tsurutani N, Ohba K, Kimura R, Komano J, Nishi M, Soeda H, Hattori S,
Perrem K, Yamamoto M, Chiba J, Mimaya J, Yoshimura K, Matsushita S, Honda M,
Yoshimura A, Sawasaki T, Aoki I, Morikawa Y, Yamamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 3-9
Fuku-ura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan. aryo@nih.go.jp

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) utilizes the macromolecular machinery
of the infected host cell to produce progeny virus. The discovery of cellular
factors that participate in HIV-1 replication pathways has provided further
insight into the molecular basis of virus-host cell interactions. Here, we report
that the suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) is an inducible host factor
during HIV-1 infection and regulates the late stages of the HIV-1 replication
pathway. SOCS1 can directly bind to the matrix and nucleocapsid regions of the
HIV-1 p55 Gag polyprotein and enhance its stability and trafficking, resulting in
the efficient production of HIV-1 particles via an IFN signaling-independent
mechanism. The depletion of SOCS1 by siRNA reduces both the targeted trafficking 
and assembly of HIV-1 Gag, resulting in its accumulation as perinuclear solid
aggregates that are eventually subjected to lysosomal degradation. These results 
together indicate that SOCS1 is a crucial host factor that regulates the
intracellular dynamism of HIV-1 Gag and could therefore be a potential new
therapeutic target for AIDS and its related disorders.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0704831105 
PMCID: PMC2224204
PMID: 18172216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

