
1. Biochemistry. 2008 Feb 19;47(7):1957-69. doi: 10.1021/bi7016552. Epub 2008 Jan
23.

The ORF3 protein of hepatitis E virus interacts with hemopexin by means of its 26
amino acid N-terminal hydrophobic domain II.

Ratra R(1), Kar-Roy A, Lal SK.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, P.O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi-110067, India.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a nonenveloped plus-stranded RNA virus that is a major
cause of acute hepatitis in many developing countries. Recent work has shown HEV 
may be endemic in developed countries also. The 5' two-thirds of the 7.2 kb
single-stranded RNA genome of HEV encodes ORF1, and the 3' end encodes the
structural proteins ORF2 and ORF3. ORF1 is the nonstructural protein involved in 
viral RNA synthesis, and ORF2 is the major capsid protein, whereas ORF3 is a very
small protein of only 123 amino acids. The precise cellular functions of ORF3
protein remain obscure, although it has been postulated to be a viral regulatory 
protein. To elucidate the role of ORF3 in viral pathogenesis, the yeast
two-hybrid system was used to screen a human liver cDNA library for proteins
interacting with ORF3. One of the ORF3-interacting partners thus isolated and
identified was hemopexin, a 60 kDa acute-phase plasma glycoprotein with a high
binding affinity to heme. The two-hybrid result was validated by in vitro
pull-down and co-immunoprecipitation assays and finally by intracellular
fluorescence resonance energy transfer. Using a deletion mapping approach, the
hydrophobic domain II of ORF3 (spanning amino acids 37 to 62) was found to be
responsible for binding to Hpx, with amino acids 63 to 77 possibly contributing
to the strength of the interaction. The biological significance of this
interaction in the virus life cycle has been discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi7016552 
PMID: 18211098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

