
1. J Virol. 2008 Aug;82(15):7640-52. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00170-08. Epub 2008 May 14.

A role for E1B-AP5 in ATR signaling pathways during adenovirus infection.

Blackford AN(1), Bruton RK, Dirlik O, Stewart GS, Taylor AM, Dobner T, Grand RJ, 
Turnell AS.

Author information: 
(1)CR-UK Institute for Cancer Studies, The Medical School, The University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

E1B-55K-associated protein 5 (E1B-AP5) is a cellular, heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein that is targeted by adenovirus (Ad) E1B-55K during infection.
The function of E1B-AP5 during infection, however, remains largely unknown. Given
the role of E1B-55K targets in the DNA damage response, we examined whether
E1B-AP5 function was integral to these pathways. Here, we show a novel role for
E1B-AP5 as a key regulator of ATR signaling pathways activated during Ad
infection. E1B-AP5 is recruited to viral replication centers during infection,
where it colocalizes with ATR-interacting protein (ATRIP) and the ATR substrate
replication protein A 32 (RPA32). Indeed, E1B-AP5 associates with ATRIP and RPA
complex component RPA70 in both uninfected and Ad-infected cells. Additionally,
glutathione S-transferase pull-downs show that E1B-AP5 associates with RPA
components RPA70 and RPA32 directly in vitro. E1B-AP5 is required for the
ATR-dependent phosphorylation of RPA32 during infection and contributes to the
Ad-induced phosphorylation of Smc1 and H2AX. In this regard, it is interesting
that Ad5 and Ad12 differentially promote the phosphorylation of RPA32, Rad9, and 
Smc1 during infection such that Ad12 promotes a significant phosphorylation of
RPA32 and Rad9, whereas Ad5 only weakly promotes RPA32 phosphorylation and does
not induce Rad9 phosphorylation. These data suggest that Ad5 and Ad12 have
evolved different strategies to regulate DNA damage signaling pathways during
infection in order to promote viral replication. Taken together, our results
define a role for E1B-AP5 in ATR signaling pathways activated during infection.
This might have broader implications for the regulation of ATR activity during
cellular DNA replication or in response to DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00170-08 
PMCID: PMC2493339
PMID: 18480432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

