
1. Retrovirology. 2008 May 22;5:40. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-5-40.

Lysine methylation of HIV-1 Tat regulates transcriptional activity of the viral
LTR.

Van Duyne R(1), Easley R, Wu W, Berro R, Pedati C, Klase Z, Kehn-Hall K, Flynn
EK, Symer DE, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)The George Washington University Medical Center, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Washington, DC 20037, USA. bcmrvv@gwumc.edu

BACKGROUND: The rate of transcription of the HIV-1 viral genome is mediated by
the interaction of the viral protein Tat with the LTR and other transcriptional
machinery. These specific interactions can be affected by the state of
post-translational modifications on Tat. Previously, we have shown that Tat can
be phosphorylated and acetylated in vivo resulting in an increase in the rate of 
transcription. In the present study, we investigated whether Tat could be
methylated on lysine residues, specifically on lysine 50 and 51, and whether this
modification resulted in a decrease of viral transcription from the LTR.
RESULTS: We analyzed the association of Tat with histone methyltransferases of
the SUV39-family of SET domain containing proteins in vitro. Tat was found to
associate with both SETDB1 and SETDB2, two enzymes which exhibit
methyltransferase activity. siRNA against SETDB1 transfected into cell systems
with both transient and integrated LTR reporter genes resulted in an increase in 
transcription of the HIV-LTR in the presence of suboptimal levels of Tat. In
vitro methylation assays with Tat peptides containing point mutations at lysines 
50 and 51 showed an increased incorporation of methyl groups on lysine 51,
however, both residues indicated susceptibility for methylation.
CONCLUSION: The association of Tat with histone methyltransferases and the
ability for Tat to be methylated suggests an interesting mechanism of
transcriptional regulation through the recruitment of chromatin remodeling
proteins to the HIV-1 promoter.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-5-40 
PMCID: PMC2412914
PMID: 18498648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

