
1. Blood. 2008 Aug 15;112(4):1299-307. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-136473. Epub 2008 
Jun 9.

The C-type lectin surface receptor DCIR acts as a new attachment factor for HIV-1
in dendritic cells and contributes to trans- and cis-infection pathways.

Lambert AA(1), Gilbert C, Richard M, Beaulieu AD, Tremblay MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine, Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie, Centre Hospitalier 
de l'Université Laval, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.

The dynamic interplay between dendritic cells (DCs) and human immunodeficiency
virus type-1 (HIV-1) is thought to result in viral dissemination and evasion of
antiviral immunity. Although initial observations suggested that the C-type
lectin receptor (CLR) DC-SIGN was responsible for the trans-infection function of
the virus, subsequent studies demonstrated that trans-infection of CD4(+) T cells
with HIV-1 can also occur through DC-SIGN-independent mechanisms. We demonstrate 
that a cell surface molecule designated DCIR (for DC immunoreceptor), a member of
a recently described family of DC-expressing CLRs, can participate in the capture
of HIV-1 and promote infection in trans and in cis of autologous CD4(+) T cells
from human immature monocyte-derived DCs. The contribution of DCIR to these
processes was revealed using DCIR-specific siRNAs and a polyclonal antibody
specific for the carbohydrate recognition domain of DCIR. Data from transfection 
experiments indicated that DCIR acts as a ligand for HIV-1 and is involved in
events leading to productive virus infection. Finally, we show that the neck
domain of DCIR is important for the DCIR-mediated effect on virus binding and
infection. These results point to a possible role for DCIR in HIV-1 pathogenesis 
by supporting the productive infection of DCs and promoting virus propagation.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-136473 
PMCID: PMC2515113
PMID: 18541725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

