
1. Virus Res. 2008 Oct;137(1):49-55. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2008.05.015. Epub 2008 
Jul 10.

Interferon antagonist function of Japanese encephalitis virus NS4A and its
interaction with DEAD-box RNA helicase DDX42.

Lin CW(1), Cheng CW, Yang TC, Li SW, Cheng MH, Wan L, Lin YJ, Lai CH, Lin WY, Kao
MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. cwlin@mail.cmu.edu.tw

The interferon (IFN) antagonists of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) proteins
contribute to the JE pathogenesis. Most flavivirus non-structural (NS) proteins
correlate with virus-induced inflammation and immune escape. NS4A proteins of
West Nile virus and dengue type 2 virus have been demonstrated to inhibit IFN
signaling. In this study, JEV NS4A without the C-terminal 2K domain has been
demonstrated to partially block activation of an IFN-stimulated response element 
(ISRE)-based cis-reporter by IFN-alpha/beta. In addition, JEV NS4A significantly 
inhibited the phosphorylation levels of STAT1 and STAT2, but not TYK2 in the
IFN-treated cells. Moreover, the N-terminus of a RNA helicase DDX42 protein
identified using a phage display human brain cDNA library have been demonstrated 
to specifically bind to JEV NS4A in vitro using a co-immunoprecipitation assay.
The interaction between JEV NS4A and RNA helicase DDX42 showed partial
co-localization in human medulloblastoma TE-671 cells by confocal microscopy.
Importantly, the expression of N-terminal DDX42 is able to overcome JEV-induced
antagonism of IFN responses. Therefore, these results show that JEV NS4A without 
the C-terminal 2K domain is associated with modulation of the IFN response and
the interaction of JEV NS4A with RNA helicase DDX42 could be important for JE
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2008.05.015 
PMID: 18588927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

