
1. Intervirology. 2008;51(2):137-43. doi: 10.1159/000141706. Epub 2008 Jun 26.

TAF1 interacts with and modulates human papillomavirus 16 E2-dependent
transcriptional regulation.

Centeno F(1), Ramírez-Salazar E, García-Villa E, Gariglio P, Garrido E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de
Estudios Avanzados del IPN, México, D.F., México.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is the main etiological factor in 
the development of cervical cancer and viral type 16 is the most frequently found
in this neoplasia. The E2 protein plays a key role in viral DNA replication,
transcription and genome maintenance. E2 is a sequence-specific DNA-binding
protein that activates or represses the transcriptional activity of promoters
depending on the distance from the E2-binding sites to the TATA box. The
transactivation properties of E2 are modulated by the interaction with several
cellular factors that regulate the recruitment of transcription factor IID. Here,
we demonstrate by pull-down assays the in vitro interaction of HPV16 E2 and TAF1.
The domain of TAF1 necessary for the binding maps into its amino region, while
the carboxy-terminal DNA-binding domain and the transactivation domain of the E2 
protein are involved in the interaction. By transient cotransfection assays on
C-33 A cells, we demonstrated that TAF1 enhances the activation of an
E2-dependent artificial promoter while overexpression of TAF1 alleviates the
E2-dependent repression of a high-risk HPV long control region. The specific
modification of the transcriptional activity of both promoters by TAF1 suggests
that the interaction between these proteins could participate in the modulation
of the transregulatory properties of E2, with important biological consequences.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000141706 
PMID: 18580066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

