
1. Virology. 2008 Sep 1;378(2):329-38. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.06.008. Epub 2008
Jul 11.

Modification of papillomavirus E2 proteins by the small ubiquitin-like modifier
family members (SUMOs).

Wu YC(1), Roark AA, Bian XL, Wilson VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial and Molecular Pathogenesis, College of Medicine, Texas
A & M Health Science Center, College Station, TX 77843-1114, USA.

Papillomavirus E2 proteins are critical regulatory proteins that function in
replication, genome segregation, and viral transcription, including control of
expression of the viral oncogenes, E6 and E7. Sumoylation is a post-translational
modification that has been shown to target and modulate the function of many
transcription factors, and we now demonstrate that E2 proteins are sumoylated.
Both bovine and human papillomavirus E2 proteins bind to the SUMO conjugation
enzyme, Ubc9, and using in vitro and E. coli sumoylation systems, these E2
proteins were readily modified by SUMO proteins. In vivo experiments further
confirmed that E2 can be sumoylated by SUMO1, SUMO2, or SUMO3. Mapping studies
identified lysine 292 as the principal residue for covalent conjugation of SUMO
to HPV16 E2, and a lysine 292 to arginine mutant showed defects for both
transcriptional activation and repression. The expression levels, intracellular
localization, and the DNA-binding activity of HPV16 E2 were unchanged by this
K292R mutation, suggesting that the transcriptional defect reflects a functional 
contribution by sumoylation at this residue. This study provides evidence that
sumoylation has a role in the regulation of papillomavirus E2, and identifies a
new mechanism for the modulation of E2 function at the post-translational level.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.06.008 
PMCID: PMC2562504
PMID: 18619639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

