
1. J Virol. 2008 Nov;82(21):10444-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00833-08. Epub 2008 Aug 13.

Binding STAT2 by the acidic domain of human cytomegalovirus IE1 promotes viral
growth and is negatively regulated by SUMO.

Huh YH(1), Kim YE, Kim ET, Park JJ, Song MJ, Zhu H, Hayward GS, Ahn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon, Gyeonggido, Republic of Korea.

The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) 72-kDa immediate-early 1 (IE1) protein is
thought to modulate cellular antiviral functions impacting on promyelocytic
leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies and signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) signaling. IE1 consists of four distinct regions: an
amino-terminal region required for nuclear localization, a large central
hydrophobic region responsible for PML targeting and transactivation activity, an
acidic domain, and a carboxyl-terminal chromatin tethering domain. We found that 
the acidic domain of IE1 is required for binding to STAT2. A mutant HCMV encoding
IE1(Delta421-475) with the acidic domain deleted was generated. In mutant
virus-infected cells, IE1(Delta421-475) failed to bind to STAT2. The growth of
mutant virus was only slightly delayed at a high multiplicity of infection (MOI) 
but was severely impaired at a low MOI with low-level accumulation of viral
proteins. When cells were pretreated with beta interferon, the mutant virus
showed an additional 1,000-fold reduction in viral growth, even at a high MOI,
compared to the wild type. The inhibition of STAT2 loading on the target promoter
upon infection was markedly reduced with mutant virus. Furthermore, sumoylation
of IE1 at this acidic domain was found to abolish the activity of IE1 to bind to 
STAT2 and repress the interferon-stimulated genes. Our results provide genetic
evidence that IE1 binding to STAT2 requires the 55-amino-acid acidic domain and
promotes viral growth by interfering with interferon signaling and demonstrate
that this viral activity is negatively regulated by a cellular sumoylation
pathway.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00833-08 
PMCID: PMC2573188
PMID: 18701593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

