
1. J Immunol. 2008 Sep 1;181(5):3706-13.

The Src kinase Lck facilitates assembly of HIV-1 at the plasma membrane.

Strasner AB(1), Natarajan M, Doman T, Key D, August A, Henderson AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Intergrated Bioscience Program in Immunobiology, Huck Institute of the Life
Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

HIV type 1 (HIV-1) assembly and egress are driven by the viral protein Gag and
occur at the plasma membrane in T cells. Recent evidence indicates that secretory
vesicles and machinery are essential components of virus packaging in both T
cells and macrophages. However, the pathways and cellular mediators of Gag
targeting to the plasma membrane are not well characterized. Lck, a lymphoid
specific Src kinase critical for T cell activation, is found in the plasma
membrane as well as various intracellular compartments and it has been suggested 
to influence HIV-1 replication. To investigate Lck as a potential regulator of
Gag targeting, we assessed HIV-1 replication and Gag-induced virus-like particle 
release in the presence and absence of Lck. Release of HIV-1 and virus-like
particles was reduced in the absence of Lck. This decrease in replication was not
due to altered HIV-1 infection, transcription or protein translation. However, in
T cells lacking Lck, HIV-1 accumulated intracellularly. In addition, expressing
Lck in HeLa cells promoted HIV-1 Gag plasma membrane localization. Palmitoylation
of the Lck unique domain, which is essential for directing Lck to the plasma
membrane, was critical for its effect on HIV-1 replication. Furthermore, HIV-1
Gag directly interacted with the Lck unique domain in the context of infected
cells. These results indicate that Lck plays a key role in targeting HIV-1 Gag to
the plasma membrane in T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.5.3706 
PMCID: PMC2587142
PMID: 18714047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

