
1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 28;283(48):33183-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807403200. Epub 2008
Oct 3.

Thioredoxin reductase-1 negatively regulates HIV-1 transactivating protein
Tat-dependent transcription in human macrophages.

Kalantari P(1), Narayan V, Natarajan SK, Muralidhar K, Gandhi UH, Vunta H,
Henderson AJ, Prabhu KS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Immunology and Infectious Disease, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Epidemiological studies suggest a correlation between severity of acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and selenium deficiency, indicating a protective
role for this anti-oxidant during HIV infection. Here we demonstrate that
thioredoxin reductase-1 (TR1), a selenium-containing pyridine
nucleotide-disulfide oxidoreductase that reduces protein disulfides to free
thiols, negatively regulates the activity of the HIV-1 encoded transcriptional
activator, Tat, in human macrophages. We used a small interfering RNA approach as
well as a high affinity substrate of TR1, ebselen, to demonstrate that
Tat-dependent transcription and HIV-1 replication were significantly increased in
human macrophages when TR1 activity was reduced. The increase in HIV-1
replication in TR1 small interfering RNA-treated cells was independent of the
redox-sensitive transcription factor, NF-kappaB. These studies indicate that TR-1
acts as a negative regulator of Tat-dependent transcription. Furthermore, in
vitro biochemical assays with recombinant Tat protein confirmed that TR1 targets 
two disulfide bonds within the Cys-rich motif required for efficient HIV-1
transactivation. Increasing TR1 expression along with other selenoproteins by
supplementing with selenium suggests a potential inexpensive adjuvant therapy for
HIV/AIDS patients.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M807403200 
PMCID: PMC2586244
PMID: 18835810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

