
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Feb;1793(2):378-87. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.10.010.
Epub 2008 Oct 31.

HIV-1 Tat C-terminus is cleaved by calpain 1: implication for Tat-mediated
neurotoxicity.

Passiatore G(1), Rom S, Eletto D, Peruzzi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Center for Neurovirology, Temple University
School of Medicine, 1900 North 12th Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122,
USA.

HIV-Encephalopathy (HIVE) is a common neurological disorder associated with HIV-1
infection and AIDS. The activity of the HIV trans-activating protein Tat is
thought to contribute to neuronal pathogenesis. While Tat proteins from primary
virus isolates consist of 101 or more amino acids, 72 and 86 amino acids forms of
Tat are commonly used for in vitro studies. Although Tat72 contains the minimal
domain required for viral replication, other activities of Tat appear to vary
according to its length, sub-cellular localization, cell type and the stage of
cellular differentiation. In this study, we investigated the stability of
intracellular Tat101 during proliferation and differentiation of neuronal cells
in culture. We have utilized rat neuronal progenitors as a model of neuronal cell
proliferation and differentiation, as well as rat primary cortical neurons as a
model of fully differentiated cells. Our results indicate that, upon
internalization, Tat101 was degraded more rapidly in proliferating cells than in 
cells which either underwent neuronal differentiation or were fully
differentiated. Intracellular degradation of Tat was prevented by the calpain 1
inhibitor, ALLN, in both proliferating and differentiated cells. Inhibition of
calpain 1 by calpastatin peptide also prevented Tat cleavage. In vitro calpain
digestion and mass spectrometry analysis further demonstrated that the sequence
of Tat sensitive to calpain cleavage was located in the C-terminus of this viral 
protein, between amino acids 68 and 69. Moreover, cleavage of Tat101 by calpain 1
increased neurotoxic effect of this viral protein and presence of the calpain
inhibitor protected neuronal cells from Tat-mediated toxicity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.10.010 
PMCID: PMC2704945
PMID: 19022302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

