
1. J Virol. 2009 Feb;83(4):1700-7. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01971-08. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Human papillomavirus E7 protein deregulates mitosis via an association with
nuclear mitotic apparatus protein 1.

Nguyen CL(1), MÃ¼nger K.

Author information: 
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

We previously observed that high-risk human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) E7
expression leads to the delocalization of dynein from mitotic spindles (C. L.
Nguyen, M. E. McLaughlin-Drubin, and K. Munger, Cancer Res. 68:8715-8722, 2008). 
Here, we show that HPV16 E7 associates with nuclear mitotic apparatus protein 1
(NuMA) and that NuMA binding and the ability to induce dynein delocalization map 
to similar carboxyl-terminal sequences of E7. Additionally, we show that the
delocalization of dynein from mitotic spindles by HPV16 E7 and the interaction
between HPV16 E7 and NuMA correlate with the induction of defects in chromosome
alignment during prometaphase even in cells with normal centrosome numbers.
Furthermore, low-risk HPV6b and HPV11 E7s also associate with NuMA and also
induce a similar mitotic defect. It is possible that the disruption of mitotic
events by HPV E7, via targeting of the NuMA/dynein complex and potentially other 
NuMA-containing complexes, contributes to viral maintenance and propagation
potentially through abrogating the differentiation program of the infected
epithelium. Furthermore, in concert with activities specific to high-risk HPV E6 
and E7, such as the inactivation of the p53 and pRB tumor suppressors,
respectively, the disruption of the NuMA/dynein network may result in mitotic
errors that would make an infected cell more prone to the accumulation of
aneuploidy even in the absence of supernumerary centrosomes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01971-08 
PMCID: PMC2643759
PMID: 19052088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

