
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):8033-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808466200. Epub 2009 
Jan 21.

TORC2, a coactivator of cAMP-response element-binding protein, promotes
Epstein-Barr virus reactivation from latency through interaction with viral BZLF1
protein.

Murata T(1), Sato Y, Nakayama S, Kudoh A, Iwahori S, Isomura H, Tajima M, Hishiki
T, Ohshima T, Hijikata M, Shimotohno K, Tsurumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1, Kanokoden, 
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.

Reactivation of the Epstein-Barr virus from latency is dependent on expression of
the viral BZLF1 protein. The BZLF1 promoter (Zp) normally exhibits only low basal
activity but is activated in response to chemical inducers such as
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate and calcium ionophore. We found here that
Transducer of Regulated cAMP-response Element-binding Protein (CREB) (TORC) 2
enhances Zp activity 10-fold and more than 100-fold with co-expression of the
BZLF1 protein. Mutational analysis of Zp revealed that the activation by TORC is 
dependent on ZII and ZIII cis elements, binding sites for CREB family
transcriptional factors and the BZLF1 protein, respectively. Immunoprecipitation,
chromatin immunoprecipitation, and reporter assay using Gal4-luc and Gal4BD-BZLF1
fusion protein indicate that TORC2 interacts with BZLF1, and that the complex is 
efficiently recruited onto Zp. These observations clearly indicate that TORC2
activates the promoter through interaction with the BZLF1 protein as well as CREB
family transcriptional factors. Induction of the lytic replication resulted in
the translocation of TORC2 from cytoplasm to viral replication compartments in
nuclei, and furthermore, activation of Zp by TORC2 was augmented by
calcium-regulated phosphatase, calcineurin. Silencing of endogenous TORC2 gene
expression by RNA interference decreased the levels of the BZLF1 protein in
response to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate/ionophore. Based on these
results, we conclude that Epstein-Barr virus exploits the calcineurin-TORC
signaling pathway through interactions between TORC and the BZLF1 protein in
reactivation from latency.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M808466200 
PMCID: PMC2658097
PMID: 19164291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

