
1. J Virol. 2009 May;83(9):4423-34. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02274-08. Epub 2009 Feb 25.

The interaction of the gammaherpesvirus 68 orf73 protein with cellular BET
proteins affects the activation of cell cycle promoters.

Ottinger M(1), Pliquet D, Christalla T, Frank R, Stewart JP, Schulz TF.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f√ºr Virologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

Infection of mice with murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV-68) provides a valuable
animal model for gamma-2 herpesvirus (rhadinovirus) infection and pathogenesis.
The MHV-68 orf73 protein has been shown to be required for the establishment of
viral latency in vivo. This study describes a novel transcriptional activation
function of the MHV-68 orf73 protein and identifies the cellular bromodomain
containing BET proteins Brd2/RING3, Brd3/ORFX, and BRD4 as interaction partners
for the MHV-68 orf73 protein. BET protein members are known to interact with
acetylated histones, and Brd2 and Brd4 have been implicated in fundamental
cellular processes, including cell cycle regulation and transcriptional
regulation. Using MHV-68 orf73 peptide array assays, we identified Brd2 and Brd4 
interaction sites in the orf73 protein. Mutation of one binding site led to a
loss of the interaction with Brd2/4 but not the retinoblastoma protein Rb, to
impaired chromatin association, and to a decreased ability to activate the
BET-responsive cyclin D1, D2, and E promoters. The results therefore pinpoint the
binding site for Brd2/4 in a rhadinoviral orf73 protein and suggest that the
recruitment of a member of the BET protein family allows the MHV-68 orf73 protein
to activate the promoters of G(1)/S cyclins. These findings point to parallels
between the transcriptional activator functions of rhadinoviral orf73 proteins
and papillomavirus E2 proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02274-08 
PMCID: PMC2668493
PMID: 19244327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

