
1. J Virol. 2009 Jun;83(11):5408-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02188-08. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

NS5 of dengue virus mediates STAT2 binding and degradation.

Ashour J(1), Laurent-Rolle M, Shi PY, Garc√≠a-Sastre A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Emerging Pathogens Institute, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The mammalian interferon (IFN) signaling pathway is a primary component of the
innate antiviral response. As such, viral pathogens have devised multiple
mechanisms to antagonize this pathway and thus facilitate infection. Dengue virus
(DENV) encodes several proteins (NS2a, NS4a, and NS4b) that have been shown
individually to inhibit the IFN response. In addition, DENV infection results in 
reduced levels of expression of STAT2, which is required for IFN signaling (M.
Jones, A. Davidson, L. Hibbert, P. Gruenwald, J. Schlaak, S. Ball, G. R. Foster, 
and M. Jacobs, J. Virol. 79:5414-5420, 2005). Translation of the DENV genome
results in a single polypeptide, which is processed by viral and host proteases
into at least 10 separate proteins. To date, no single DENV protein has been
implicated in the targeting of STAT2 for decreased levels of expression. We
demonstrate here that the polymerase of the virus, NS5, binds to STAT2 and is
necessary and sufficient for its reduced level of expression. The decrease in
protein level observed requires ubiquitination and proteasome activity, strongly 
suggesting an active degradation process. Furthermore, we show that the
degradation of but not binding to STAT2 is dependent on the expression of the
polymerase in the context of a polyprotein that undergoes proteolytic processing 
for NS5 maturation. Thus, the mature form of NS5, when not expressed as a
precursor, was able to bind to STAT2 but was unable to target it for degradation,
establishing a unique role for viral polyprotein processing in providing an
additional function to a viral polypeptide. Therefore, we have identified both a 
novel mechanism by which DENV evades the innate immune response and a potential
target for antiviral therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02188-08 
PMCID: PMC2681973
PMID: 19279106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

