
1. J Virol. 2009 Jun;83(11):5329-38. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00089-09. Epub 2009 Mar 18.

Identification of integrin alpha3 as a new substrate of the adenovirus E4orf6/E1B
55-kilodalton E3 ubiquitin ligase complex.

Dallaire F(1), Blanchette P, Groitl P, Dobner T, Branton PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The human adenovirus E4orf6 and E1B55K proteins promote viral replication by
targeting several cellular proteins for degradation. The E4orf6 product has been 
shown by our group and others to form an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex that
contains elongins B and C and cullin family member Cul5. E1B55K associates with
this complex, where it is believed to function primarily to introduce bound
substrates for degradation via proteasomes. In addition to p53, its first known
substrate, the E4orf6/E1B 55-kDa complex (E4orf6/E1B55K) was shown to promote the
degradation of Mre11 and DNA ligase IV; however, additional substrates are
believed to exist. This notion is strengthened by the fact that none of these
substrates seems likely to be associated with additional functions shown to be
mediated by the E4orf6-associated E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, including export
of late viral mRNAs and blockage of export of the bulk cellular mRNAs from the
nucleus. In an attempt to identify new E4orf6/E1B55K substrates, we undertook a
proteomic screen using human p53-null, non-small-cell lung carcinoma H1299 cells 
expressing either E4orf6 protein alone or in combination with E1B55K through
infection by appropriate adenovirus vectors. One cellular protein that appeared
to be degraded by E1B55K in combination with the E4orf6 protein was a species of 
molecular mass approximately 130 kDa that was identified as the integrin alpha3
subunit (i.e., very late activation antigen 3 alpha subunit). Preliminary
analyses suggested that degradation of alpha3 may play a role in promoting
release and spread of progeny virions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00089-09 
PMCID: PMC2681983
PMID: 19297475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

