
1. Genes Dev. 1991 Nov;5(11):2128-40.

tat regulates binding of the human immunodeficiency virus trans-activating region
RNA loop-binding protein TRP-185.

Wu F(1), Garcia J, Sigman D, Gaynor R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas 75235.

The TAR element extending from -17 to +80 in the human immunodeficiency virus
long terminal repeat (HIV LTR) is required for activation of gene expression by
the tat trans-activator protein. TAR RNA forms a stable stem-loop structure, and 
mutagenesis studies indicate that the stem structure, the primary sequence of the
loop, and the bulge element are the major determinants for tat activation. RNA
gel retardation analysis demonstrates that both tat and cellular proteins bind to
TAR RNA, but the mechanism by which these proteins increase HIV gene expression
is unknown. We have fractionated HeLa cell nuclear extracts in an attempt to
identify cellular proteins that bind to TAR RNA and are involved in regulating
HIV gene expression. RNA gel retardation and UV cross-linking reveal that a
cellular protein of 185 kD, which we designate TAR RNA-binding protein 185
(TRP-185), binds with both high affinity and marked specificity to TAR RNA. RNA
gel retardation and competition analyses indicate that TRP-185 binding is
strongly dependent on the TAR RNA loop sequences. The binding of TRP-185 is
modulated by both a set of cellular cofactors and the tat protein. Highly
purified preparations of TRP-185 are capable of activating in vitro transcription
of wild-type, but not mutated, HIV LTR chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
constructs. These results characterize a positively acting cellular RNA-binding
factor, TRP-185, which is involved in the regulation of HIV gene expression.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.5.11.2128 
PMID: 1936997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

