
1. J Virol. 2009 Jun;83(12):6199-210. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00052-09. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

Cell cycle control of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus latency
transcription by CTCF-cohesin interactions.

Kang H(1), Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) latency is characterized by the
highly regulated transcription of a few viral genes essential for genome
maintenance and host cell survival. A major latency control region has been
identified upstream of the divergent promoters for the multicistronic transcripts
encoding LANA (ORF73), vCyclin (ORF72), and vFLIP (ORF71) and for the
complementary strand transcript encoding K14 and vGPCR (ORF74). Previous studies 
have shown that this major latency control region is occupied by the cellular
chromatin boundary factor CTCF and chromosome structural maintenance proteins
SMC1, SMC3, and RAD21, which comprise the cohesin complex. Deletion of the
CTCF-cohesin binding site caused an inhibition of cell growth and viral genome
instability. We now show that the KSHV genes regulated by CTCF-cohesin are under 
cell cycle control and that mutation of the CTCF binding sites abolished cell
cycle-regulated transcription. Cohesin subunits assembled at the CTCF binding
sites and bound CTCF proteins in a cell cycle-dependent manner. Subcellular
distribution of CTCF and colocalization with cohesins also varied across the cell
cycle. Ectopic expression of Rad21 repressed CTCF-regulated transcription of KSHV
lytic genes, and a Rad21-CTCF chimeric protein converted CTCF into an efficient
transcriptional repressor of KSHV genes normally activated in the G(2) phase. We 
conclude that cohesins interact with CTCF in mid-S phase and repress
CTCF-regulated genes in a cell cycle-dependent manner. We propose that the
CTCF-cohesin complex plays a critical role in regulating the cell cycle control
of viral gene expression during latency and that failure to maintain cell cycle
control of latent transcripts inhibits host cell proliferation and survival.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00052-09 
PMCID: PMC2687369
PMID: 19369356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

