
1. J Virol. 2009 Jul;83(13):6641-51. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00049-09. Epub 2009 Apr 22.

Homologous recombinational repair factors are recruited and loaded onto the viral
DNA genome in Epstein-Barr virus replication compartments.

Kudoh A(1), Iwahori S, Sato Y, Nakayama S, Isomura H, Murata T, Tsurumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1 Kanokoden,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.

Homologous recombination is an important biological process that facilitates
genome rearrangement and repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). The induction
of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) lytic replication induces ataxia
telangiectasia-mutated (ATM)-dependent DNA damage checkpoint signaling, leading
to the clustering of phosphorylated ATM and Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (MRN) complexes to
sites of viral genome synthesis in nuclei. Here we report that homologous
recombinational repair (HRR) factors such as replication protein A (RPA), Rad51, 
and Rad52 as well as MRN complexes are recruited and loaded onto the newly
synthesized viral genome in replication compartments. The 32-kDa subunit of RPA
is extensively phosphorylated at sites in accordance with those with ATM. The
hyperphosphorylation of RPA32 causes a change in RPA conformation, resulting in a
switch from the catalysis of DNA replication to the participation in DNA repair. 
The levels of Rad51 and phosphorylated RPA were found to increase with the
progression of viral productive replication, while that of Rad52 proved constant.
Furthermore, biochemical fractionation revealed increases in levels of DNA-bound 
forms of these HRRs. Bromodeoxyuridine-labeled chromatin immunoprecipitation and 
PCR analyses confirmed the loading of RPA, Rad 51, Rad52, and Mre11 onto newly
synthesized viral DNA, and terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP
nick end labeling analysis demonstrated DSBs in the EBV replication compartments.
HRR factors might be recruited to repair DSBs on the viral genome in viral
replication compartments. RNA interference knockdown of RPA32 and Rad51 prevented
viral DNA synthesis remarkably, suggesting that homologous recombination and/or
repair of viral DNA genome might occur, coupled with DNA replication to
facilitate viral genome synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00049-09 
PMCID: PMC2698542
PMID: 19386720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

