
1. RNA. 2009 Aug;15(8):1528-42. doi: 10.1261/rna.1578409. Epub 2009 Jun 18.

IGF2BP1 enhances HCV IRES-mediated translation initiation via the 3'UTR.

Weinlich S(1), HÃ¼ttelmaier S, Schierhorn A, Behrens SE, Ostareck-Lederer A,
Ostareck DH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin-Luther-University
Halle-Wittenberg, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany.

The positive-strand RNA genome of the Hepatitis C virus (HCV) contains an
internal ribosome entry site (IRES) in the 5'untranslated region (5'UTR) and
structured sequence elements within the 3'UTR, but no poly(A) tail. Employing a
limited set of initiation factors, the HCV IRES coordinates the 5'cap-independent
assembly of the 43S pre-initiation complex at an internal initiation codon
located in the IRES sequence. We have established a Huh7 cell-derived in vitro
translation system that shows a 3'UTR-dependent enhancement of 43S pre-initiation
complex formation at the HCV IRES. Through the use of tobramycin (Tob)-aptamer
affinity chromatography, we identified the Insulin-like growth factor-II
mRNA-binding protein 1 (IGF2BP1) as a factor that interacts with both, the HCV
5'UTR and 3'UTR. We report that IGF2BP1 specifically enhances translation at the 
HCV IRES, but it does not affect 5'cap-dependent translation. RNA interference
against IGF2BP1 in HCV replicon RNA-containing Huh7 cells reduces HCV
IRES-mediated translation, whereas replication remains unaffected. Interestingly,
we found that endogenous IGF2BP1 specifically co-immunoprecipitates with HCV
replicon RNA, the ribosomal 40S subunit, and eIF3. Furthermore eIF3 comigrates
with IGF2BP1 in 80S ribosomal complexes when a reporter mRNA bearing both the HCV
5'UTR and HCV 3'UTR is translated. Our data suggest that IGF2BP1, by binding to
the HCV 5'UTR and/or HCV 3'UTR, recruits eIF3 and enhances HCV IRES-mediated
translation.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.1578409 
PMCID: PMC2714754
PMID: 19541769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

