
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000493. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000493. Epub 2009
Jun 26.

Ebola Zaire virus blocks type I interferon production by exploiting the host SUMO
modification machinery.

Chang TH(1), Kubota T, Matsuoka M, Jones S, Bradfute SB, Bray M, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Ebola Zaire virus is highly pathogenic for humans, with case fatality rates
approaching 90% in large outbreaks in Africa. The virus replicates in macrophages
and dendritic cells (DCs), suppressing production of type I interferons (IFNs)
while inducing the release of large quantities of proinflammatory cytokines.
Although the viral VP35 protein has been shown to inhibit IFN responses, the
mechanism by which it blocks IFN production has not been fully elucidated. We
expressed VP35 from a mouse-adapted variant of Ebola Zaire virus in murine DCs by
retroviral gene transfer, and tested for IFN transcription upon Newcastle Disease
virus (NDV) infection and toll-like receptor signaling. We found that VP35
inhibited IFN transcription in DCs following these stimuli by disabling the
activity of IRF7, a transcription factor required for IFN transcription. By yeast
two-hybrid screens and coimmunoprecipitation assays, we found that VP35
interacted with IRF7, Ubc9 and PIAS1. The latter two are the host SUMO E2 enzyme 
and E3 ligase, respectively. VP35, while not itself a SUMO ligase, increased
PIAS1-mediated SUMOylation of IRF7, and repressed Ifn transcription. In contrast,
VP35 did not interfere with the activation of NF-kappaB, which is required for
induction of many proinflammatory cytokines. Our findings indicate that Ebola
Zaire virus exploits the cellular SUMOylation machinery for its advantage and
help to explain how the virus overcomes host innate defenses, causing rapidly
overwhelming infection to produce a syndrome resembling fulminant septic shock.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000493 
PMCID: PMC2696038
PMID: 19557165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

