
1. J Virol. 2009 Oct;83(19):9993-10006. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00509-09. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

The hepatitis C virus core protein contains a BH3 domain that regulates apoptosis
through specific interaction with human Mcl-1.

Mohd-Ismail NK(1), Deng L, Sukumaran SK, Yu VC, Hotta H, Tan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Collaborative Anti-Viral Research Group, Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Singapore.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein is known to modulate apoptosis and
contribute to viral replication and pathogenesis. In this study, we have
identified a Bcl-2 homology 3 (BH3) domain in the core protein that is essential 
for its proapoptotic property. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that the 
core protein interacts specifically with the human myeloid cell factor 1 (Mcl-1),
a prosurvival member of the Bcl-2 family, but not with other prosurvival members 
(Bcl-X(L) and Bcl-w). Moreover, the overexpression of Mcl-1 protects against
core-induced apoptosis. By using peptide mimetics, core was found to release
cytochrome c from isolated mitochondria when complemented with Bad. Thus, core is
a bona fide BH3-only protein having properties similar to those of Noxa, a
BH3-only member of the Bcl-2 family that binds preferentially to Mcl-1. There are
three critical hydrophobic residues in the BH3 domain of the core protein, and
they are essential for the proapoptotic property of the core protein.
Furthermore, the genotype 1b core protein is more effective than the genotype 2a 
core protein in inducing apoptosis due to a single-amino-acid difference at one
of these hydrophobic residues (residue 119). Replacing this residue in the
J6/JFH-1 infectious clone (genotype 2a) with the corresponding amino acid in the 
genotype 1b core protein produced a mutant virus, J6/JFH-1(V119L), which induced 
significantly higher levels of apoptosis in the infected cells than the parental 
J6/JFH-1 virus. Furthermore, the core protein of J6/JFH-1(V119L), but not that of
J6/JFH-1, interacted with Mcl-1 in virus-infected cells. Taken together, the core
protein is a novel BH3-only viral homologue that contributes to the induction of 
apoptosis during HCV infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00509-09 
PMCID: PMC2748021
PMID: 19605477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

