
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 9;284(41):27766-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006809. Epub 2009
Aug 13.

Adenovirus E1A inhibits SCF(Fbw7) ubiquitin ligase.

Isobe T(1), Hattori T, Kitagawa K, Uchida C, Kotake Y, Kosugi I, Oda T, Kitagawa 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry 1, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 
Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.

The SCF(Fbw7) ubiquitin ligase complex plays important roles in cell growth,
survival, and differentiation via the ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated regulation of
protein stability. Fbw7 (also known as Fbxw7, Sel-10, hCdc4, or hAgo), a
substrate recognition subunit of SCF(Fbw7) ubiquitin ligase, facilitates the
degradation of several proto-oncogene products by the proteasome. Given that
mutations in Fbw7 are found in various types of human cancers, Fbw7 is considered
to be a potent tumor suppressor. In the present study, we show that E1A, an
oncogene product derived from adenovirus, interferes with the activity of the
SCF(Fbw7) ubiquitin ligase. E1A interacted with SCF(Fbw7) and attenuated the
ubiquitylation of its target proteins in vivo. Furthermore, using in vitro
purified SCF(Fbw7) component proteins, we found that E1A directly bound to
Roc1/Rbx1 and CUL1 and that E1A inhibited the ubiquitin ligase activity of the
Roc1/Rbx1-CUL1 complex but not that of another RING-type ubiquitin ligase, Mdm2. 
Ectopically expressed E1A interacted with cellular endogenous Roc1/Rbx1 and CUL1 
and decelerated the degradation of several protooncogene products that were
degraded by SCF(Fbw7) ubiquitin ligase. Moreover, after wild-type adenovirus
infection, adenovirus-derived E1A interacted with endogenous Roc1/Rbx1 and
decelerated degradation of the endogenous target protein of SCF(Fbw7). These
observations demonstrated that E1A perturbs protein turnover regulated by
SCF(Fbw7) through the inhibition of SCF(Fbw7) ubiquitin ligase. Our findings may 
help to explain the mechanism whereby adenovirus infection induces unregulated
proliferation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006809 
PMCID: PMC2788827
PMID: 19679664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

