
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 23;284(43):29979-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.022566. Epub
2009 Aug 28.

New structural arrangement of the extracellular regions of the phosphate
transporter SLC20A1, the receptor for gibbon ape leukemia virus.

Farrell KB(1), Tusnady GE, Eiden MV.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Virology, Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular
Regulation, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Infection of a host cell by a retrovirus requires an initial interaction with a
cellular receptor. For numerous gammaretroviruses, such as the gibbon ape
leukemia virus, woolly monkey virus, feline leukemia virus subgroup B, feline
leukemia virus subgroup T, and 10A1 murine leukemia virus, this receptor is the
human type III sodium-dependent inorganic phosphate transporter, SLC20A1,
formerly known as PiT1. Understanding the critical receptor functionalities and
interactions with the virus that lead to successful infection requires that we
first know the surface structure of the cellular receptor. Previous molecular
modeling from the protein sequence, and limited empirical data, predicted a
protein with 10 transmembrane helices. Here we undertake the biochemical approach
of substituted cysteine accessibility mutagenesis to resolve the topology of this
receptor in live cells. We discover that there are segments of the protein that
are unexpectedly exposed to the outside milieu. By using information determined
by substituted cysteine accessibility mutagenesis to set constraints in HMMTOP, a
hidden Markov model-based transmembrane topology prediction method, we now
propose a comprehensive topological model for SLC20A1, a transmembrane protein
with 12 transmembrane helices and 7 extracellular regions, that varies from
previous models and should permit approaches that define both virus interaction
and transport function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.022566 
PMCID: PMC2785626
PMID: 19717569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

