
1. J Virol. 2009 Dec;83(23):12164-71. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01676-09. Epub 2009 Sep 16.

Interaction of ICP34.5 with Beclin 1 modulates herpes simplex virus type 1
pathogenesis through control of CD4+ T-cell responses.

Leib DA(1), Alexander DE, Cox D, Yin J, Ferguson TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center,
Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. David.A.Leib@Dartmouth.edu

Autophagy is an important component of host innate and adaptive immunity to
viruses. It is critical for the degradation of intracellular pathogens and for
promoting antigen presentation. Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection
induces an autophagy response, but this response is antagonized by the HSV-1
neurovirulence gene product, ICP34.5. This is due, in part, to its interaction
with the essential autophagy protein Beclin 1 (Atg6) via the Beclin-binding
domain (BBD) of ICP34.5. Using a recombinant virus lacking the BBD, we examined
pathogenesis and immune responses using mouse models of infection. The
BBD-deficient virus (Delta68H) replicated equivalently to its marker-rescued
counterpart (Delta68HR) at early times but was cleared more rapidly than
Delta68HR from all tissues at late times following corneal infection. In
addition, the infection of the cornea with Delta68H induced less ocular disease
than Delta68HR. These results suggested that Delta68H was attenuated due to its
failure to control adaptive rather than innate immunity. In support of this idea,
Delta68H stimulated a significantly stronger CD4(+) T-cell-mediated delayed-type 
hypersensitivity response and resulted in significantly more production of gamma 
interferon and interleukin-2 from HSV-specific CD4(+) T cells than Delta68HR.
Taken together, these data suggest a role for the BBD of ICP34.5 in precluding
autophagy-mediated class II antigen presentation, thereby enhancing the virulence
and pathogenesis of HSV-1.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01676-09 
PMCID: PMC2786728
PMID: 19759141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

