
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Oct;5(10):e1000624. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000624. Epub
2009 Oct 16.

EBNA1-mediated recruitment of a histone H2B deubiquitylating complex to the
Epstein-Barr virus latent origin of DNA replication.

Sarkari F(1), Sanchez-Alcaraz T, Wang S, Holowaty MN, Sheng Y, Frappier L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The EBNA1 protein of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) plays essential roles in enabling
the replication and persistence of EBV genomes in latently infected cells and
activating EBV latent gene expression, in all cases by binding to specific
recognition sites in the latent origin of replication, oriP. Here we show that
EBNA1 binding to its recognition sites in vitro is greatly stimulated by binding 
to the cellular deubiquitylating enzyme, USP7, and that USP7 can form a ternary
complex with DNA-bound EBNA1. Consistent with the in vitro effects, the assembly 
of EBNA1 on oriP elements in human cells was decreased by USP7 silencing, whereas
assembly of an EBNA1 mutant defective in USP7 binding was unaffected. USP7
affinity column profiling identified a complex between USP7 and human GMP
synthetase (GMPS), which was shown to stimulate the ability of USP7 to cleave
monoubiquitin from histone H2B in vitro. Accordingly, silencing of USP7 in human 
cells resulted in a consistent increase in the level of monoubquitylated H2B. The
USP7-GMPS complex formed a quaternary complex with DNA-bound EBNA1 in vitro and, 
in EBV infected cells, was preferentially detected at the oriP functional
element, FR, along with EBNA1. Down-regulation of USP7 reduced the level of GMPS 
at the FR, increased the level of monoubiquitylated H2B in this region of the
origin and decreased the ability of EBNA1, but not an EBNA1 USP7-binding mutant, 
to activate transcription from the FR. The results indicate that USP7 can
stimulate EBNA1-DNA interactions and that EBNA1 can alter histone modification at
oriP through recruitment of USP7.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000624 
PMCID: PMC2757719
PMID: 19834552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

