
1. J Gen Virol. 2010 Feb;91(Pt 2):373-81. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.015305-0. Epub 2009 Oct
21.

Hepatitis C virus NS5A protein interacts with beta-catenin and stimulates its
transcriptional activity in a phosphoinositide-3 kinase-dependent fashion.

Milward A(1), Mankouri J, Harris M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Astbury Centre for Structural 
Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, West Yorkshire, UK.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is increasingly associated with the development
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HCV is not thought to be directly oncogenic
but, by modulating a range of cellular functions, may predispose patients to the 
development of liver tumours. However, the molecular mechanisms by which HCV
infection might contribute to HCC remain to be characterized. In this regard, we 
showed previously that the HCV NS5A protein bound to the p85 regulatory subunit
of phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K), thereby stimulating the activity of the p110
catalytic subunit of the enzyme. One of the downstream consequences of this was
the stabilization of the proto-oncogene, beta-catenin, with a concomitant
stimulation of its transcriptional activity. Here, we further analyse the
mechanism by which NS5A mediates activation of beta-catenin. Although our
previous data were consistent with a role for the PI3K downstream effector
kinases, Akt and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta, in NS5A-mediated activation of
beta-catenin, we demonstrate here that it is in fact independent of both of these
kinases. Truncation analysis revealed that both the N and C termini of NS5A are
required for full activation of beta-catenin. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
NS5A, either alone or in complex with p85, is able to bind directly to
beta-catenin; again both N and C termini contribute to this interaction. We
propose that NS5A activates beta-catenin via a novel mechanism that involves a
direct interaction between the two proteins and is augmented by PI3K activity.
This may contribute to the association between chronic HCV infection and the
development of HCC.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.015305-0 
PMID: 19846673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

