
1. J Virol. 2010 Jan;84(2):928-39. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01165-09. Epub 2009 Nov 4.

Nonstructural NSs protein of rift valley fever virus interacts with
pericentromeric DNA sequences of the host cell, inducing chromosome cohesion and 
segregation defects.

Mansuroglu Z(1), Josse T, Gilleron J, Billecocq A, Leger P, Bouloy M, Bonnefoy E.

Author information: 
(1)Régulation de la Transcription et Maladies Génétiques, CNRS UPR2228,
Université Paris Descartes, 45 Rue des Saints Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06,
France.

Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) is an emerging, highly pathogenic virus; RVFV
infection can lead to encephalitis, retinitis, or fatal hepatitis associated with
hemorrhagic fever in humans, as well as death, abortions, and fetal deformities
in animals. RVFV nonstructural NSs protein, a major factor of the virulence,
forms filamentous structures in the nuclei of infected cells. In order to further
understand RVFV pathology, we investigated, by chromatin immunoprecipitation,
immunofluorescence, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and confocal microscopy, 
the capacity of NSs to interact with the host genome. Our results demonstrate
that even though cellular DNA is predominantly excluded from NSs filaments, NSs
interacts with some specific DNA regions of the host genome such as clusters of
pericentromeric gamma-satellite sequence. Targeting of these sequences by NSs was
correlated with the induction of chromosome cohesion and segregation defects in
RVFV-infected murine, as well as sheep cells. Using recombinant nonpathogenic
virus rZHDeltaNSs210-230, expressing a NSs protein deleted of its region of
interaction with cellular factor SAP30, we showed that the NSs-SAP30 interaction 
was essential for NSs to target pericentromeric sequences, as well as for
induction of chromosome segregation defects. The effect of RVFV upon the
inheritance of genetic information is discussed with respect to the pathology
associated with fetal deformities and abortions, highlighting the main role
played by cellular cofactor SAP30 on the establishment of NSs interactions with
host DNA sequences and RVFV pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01165-09 
PMCID: PMC2798389
PMID: 19889787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

