
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 12;285(7):4695-708. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.053769. Epub 2009
Dec 2.

Vaccinia virus F1L interacts with Bak using highly divergent Bcl-2 homology
domains and replaces the function of Mcl-1.

Campbell S(1), Hazes B, Kvansakul M, Colman P, Barry M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2S2, Canada.

The Bcl-2 family regulates induction of apoptosis at the mitochondria. Essential 
to this regulation are the interactions between Bcl-2 family members, which are
mediated by Bcl-2 homology (BH) domains. Vaccinia virus F1L is a unique inhibitor
of apoptosis that lacks significant sequence similarity with the Bcl-2 family and
does not contain obvious BH domains. Despite this, F1L inhibits cytochrome c
release from mitochondria by preventing Bak and Bax activation. Although F1L
constitutively interacts with Bak to prevent Bak activation, the precise
mechanism of this interaction remains elusive. We have identified highly
divergent BH domains in F1L that were verified by the recent crystal structure of
F1L (Kvansakul, M., Yang, H., Fairlie, W. D., Czabotar, P. E., Fischer, S. F.,
Perugini, M. A., Huang, D. C., and Colman, P. M. (2008) Cell Death Differ. 15,
1564-1571). Here we show that F1L required these BH domains to interact with
ectopically expressed and endogenous Bak. The interaction between F1L and Bak was
conserved across species, and both F1L and the cellular antiapoptotic protein
Mcl-1 required the Bak BH3 domain for interaction. Moreover, F1L replaced Mcl-1
during infection, as the Bak x Mcl-1 complex was disrupted during vaccinia virus 
infection. In contrast to UV irradiation, vaccinia virus infection did not result
in rapid degradation of Mcl-1, consistent with our observation that vaccinia
virus did not initiate a DNA damage response. Additionally, Mcl-1 expression
prevented Bak activation and apoptosis during infection with a proapoptotic
vaccinia virus devoid of F1L. Our data suggest that F1L replaces the
antiapoptotic activity of Mcl-1 during vaccinia virus infection by interacting
with Bak using highly divergent BH domains.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.053769 
PMCID: PMC2836074
PMID: 19955184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

