
1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jan 15;6(1):e1000723. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000723.

Structure of the HCMV UL16-MICB complex elucidates select binding of a viral
immunoevasin to diverse NKG2D ligands.

MÃ¼ller S(1), Zocher G, Steinle A, Stehle T.

Author information: 
(1)Interfaculty Institute for Biochemistry, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen,
Germany.

The activating immunoreceptor NKG2D promotes elimination of infected or malignant
cells by cytotoxic lymphocytes through engagement of stress-induced MHC class
I-related ligands. The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)-encoded immunoevasin UL16
subverts NKG2D-mediated immune responses by retaining a select group of diverse
NKG2D ligands inside the cell. We report here the crystal structure of UL16 in
complex with the NKG2D ligand MICB at 1.8 A resolution, revealing the molecular
basis for the promiscuous, but highly selective, binding of UL16 to unrelated
NKG2D ligands. The immunoglobulin-like UL16 protein utilizes a three-stranded
beta-sheet to engage the alpha-helical surface of the MHC class I-like MICB
platform domain. Intriguingly, residues at the center of this beta-sheet mimic a 
central binding motif employed by the structurally unrelated C-type lectin-like
NKG2D to facilitate engagement of diverse NKG2D ligands. Using surface plasmon
resonance, we find that UL16 binds MICB, ULBP1, and ULBP2 with similar affinities
that lie in the nanomolar range (12-66 nM). The ability of UL16 to bind its
ligands depends critically on the presence of a glutamine (MICB) or closely
related glutamate (ULBP1 and ULBP2) at position 169. An arginine residue at this 
position however, as found for example in MICA or ULBP3, would cause steric
clashes with UL16 residues. The inability of UL16 to bind MICA and ULBP3 can
therefore be attributed to single substitutions at key NKG2D ligand locations.
This indicates that selective pressure exerted by viral immunoevasins such as
UL16 contributed to the diversification of NKG2D ligands.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000723 
PMCID: PMC2797645
PMID: 20090832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

