
1. J Virol. 2010 Apr;84(8):3857-67. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01994-09. Epub 2010 Feb 3.

The ORF3 protein of hepatitis E virus delays degradation of activated growth
factor receptors by interacting with CIN85 and blocking formation of the
Cbl-CIN85 complex.

Chandra V(1), Kalia M, Hajela K, Jameel S.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
(ICGEB), Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110 067, India.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) causes an acute self-limiting disease that is endemic in 
developing countries. Previous studies suggested that the ORF3 protein (pORF3) of
HEV is required for infection in vivo and is likely to modulate the host
response. Our previous work showed that pORF3 localizes to early and recycling
endosomes and causes a delay in the postinternalization trafficking of epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) to late endosomes/lysosomes. Here we report that
pORF3 also delays the trafficking and degradation of activated hepatocyte growth 
factor receptor (c-Met) and delineate the mechanistic details of these effects. A
mutant ORF3 protein, which does not localize to endosomes, also showed similar
effects on growth factor receptor trafficking, making this effect independent of 
the endosomal localization of pORF3. The ORF3 protein was found to interact with 
CIN85, a multidomain adaptor protein implicated in the Cbl-mediated
downregulation of receptor tyrosine kinases. This interaction competed with the
formation of the growth factor receptor-Cbl-CIN85 complex, resulting in the
reduced ubiquitination of CIN85 and trafficking of the growth factor receptor
complex toward late endosomes/lysosomes. We propose that through its effects on
growth factor receptor trafficking, pORF3 prolongs endomembrane growth factor
signaling and promotes cell survival to contribute positively to viral
replication and pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01994-09 
PMCID: PMC2849493
PMID: 20130058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

