
1. J Virol. 2010 Apr;84(8):3935-48. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02467-09. Epub 2010 Feb 10.

Lentiviral Nef proteins utilize PAK2-mediated deregulation of cofilin as a
general strategy to interfere with actin remodeling.

Stolp B(1), Abraham L, Rudolph JM, Fackler OT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Virology, University of Heidelberg, INF
324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. oliver.fackler@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Nef is an accessory protein and pathogenicity factor of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) which elevates virus
replication in vivo. We recently described for HIV type 1(SF2) (HIV-1(SF2)) the
potent interference of Nef with T-lymphocyte chemotaxis via its association with 
the cellular kinase PAK2. Mechanistic analysis revealed that this interaction
results in deregulation of the actin-severing factor cofilin and thus blocks the 
chemokine-mediated actin remodeling required for cell motility. However, the
efficiency of PAK2 association is highly variable among Nef proteins from
different lentiviruses, prompting us to evaluate the conservation of this
actin-remodeling/cofilin-deregulating mechanism. Based on the analysis of a total
of 17 HIV-1, HIV-2, and SIV Nef proteins, we report here that inhibition of
chemokine-induced actin remodeling as well as inactivation of cofilin are
strongly conserved activities of lentiviral Nef proteins. Of note, even for Nef
variants that display only marginal PAK2 association in vitro, these activities
require the integrity of a PAK2 recruitment motif and the presence of endogenous 
PAK2. Thus, reduced in vitro affinity to PAK2 does not indicate limited
functionality of Nef-PAK2 complexes in intact HIV-1 host cells. These results
establish hijacking of PAK2 for deregulation of cofilin and inhibition of
triggered actin remodeling as a highly conserved function of lentiviral Nef
proteins, supporting the notion that PAK2 association may be critical for Nef's
activity in vivo.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02467-09 
PMCID: PMC2849517
PMID: 20147394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

