
1. J Virol. 2010 Aug;84(16):7983-93. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00068-10. Epub 2010 Jun 9.

Polo-like kinase 1 is involved in hepatitis C virus replication by
hyperphosphorylating NS5A.

Chen YC(1), Su WC, Huang JY, Chao TC, Jeng KS, Machida K, Lai MM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) replication involves many viral and host factors. Here,
we employed a lentivirus-based RNA interference (RNAi) screening approach to
search for possible cellular factors. By using a kinase-phosphatase RNAi library 
and an HCV replicon reporter system, we identified a serine-threonine kinase,
Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1), as a potential host factor regulating HCV replication.
Knockdown of Plk1 reduced both HCV RNA replication and nonstructural (NS) protein
production in both HCV replicon cells and HCV-infected cells while it did not
significantly affect host cellular growth or cell cycle. Overexpression of Plk1
in the knockdown cells rescued HCV replication. Interestingly, the ratio between 
the hyperphosphorylated form (p58) and the basal phosphorylated form (p56) of
NS5A was lower in the Plk1 knockdown cells and Plk1 kinase inhibitor-treated
cells than in the control groups. Further studies showed that Plk1 could be
immunoprecipitated together with NS5A. Both proteins partially colocalized in the
perinuclear region. Furthermore, Plk1 could phosphorylate NS5A to both the p58
and p56 forms in an in vitro assay system; the phosphorylation efficiency was
comparable to that of the reported casein kinase. Taken together, this study
shows that Plk1 is an NS5A phosphokinase and thereby indirectly regulates HCV RNA
replication. Because of the differential effects of Plk1 on HCV replication and
host cell growth, Plk1 could potentially serve as a target for anti-HCV therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00068-10 
PMCID: PMC2916529
PMID: 20534861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

