
1. J Virol. 2010 Sep;84(17):8871-87. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00725-10. Epub 2010 Jun 23.

Identification of rep-associated factors in herpes simplex virus type 1-induced
adeno-associated virus type 2 replication compartments.

Nicolas A(1), Alazard-Dany N, Biollay C, Arata L, Jolinon N, Kuhn L, Ferro M,
Weller SK, Epstein AL, Salvetti A, Greco A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U758, Lyon F-69007, France.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) is a human parvovirus that replicates only in cells 
coinfected with a helper virus, such as adenovirus or herpes simplex virus type 1
(HSV-1). We previously showed that nine HSV-1 factors are able to support AAV rep
gene expression and genome replication. To elucidate the strategy of AAV
replication in the presence of HSV-1, we undertook a proteomic analysis of
cellular and HSV-1 factors associated with Rep proteins and thus potentially
recruited within AAV replication compartments (AAV RCs). This study resulted in
the identification of approximately 60 cellular proteins, among which factors
involved in DNA and RNA metabolism represented the largest functional categories.
Validation analyses indicated that the cellular DNA replication enzymes RPA, RFC,
and PCNA were recruited within HSV-1-induced AAV RCs. Polymerase delta was not
identified but subsequently was shown to colocalize with Rep within AAV RCs even 
in the presence of the HSV-1 polymerase complex. In addition, we found that AAV
replication is associated with the recruitment of components of the
Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 complex, Ku70 and -86, and the mismatch repair proteins MSH2,
-3, and -6. Finally, several HSV-1 factors were also found to be associated with 
Rep, including UL12. We demonstrated for the first time that this protein plays a
role during AAV replication by enhancing the resolution of AAV replicative forms 
and AAV particle production. Altogether, these analyses provide the basis to
understand how AAV adapts its replication strategy to the nuclear environment
induced by the helper virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00725-10 
PMCID: PMC2919046
PMID: 20573815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

