
1. J Virol. 2010 Oct;84(19):10016-25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00239-10. Epub 2010 Jul 14.

TMPRSS2 and TMPRSS4 facilitate trypsin-independent spread of influenza virus in
Caco-2 cells.

Bertram S(1), Glowacka I, Blazejewska P, Soilleux E, Allen P, Danisch S, Steffen 
I, Choi SY, Park Y, Schneider H, Schughart K, PÃ¶hlmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Proteolysis of influenza virus hemagglutinin by host cell proteases is essential 
for viral infectivity, but the proteases responsible are not well defined.
Recently, we showed that engineered expression of the type II transmembrane
serine proteases (TTSPs) TMPRSS2 and TMPRSS4 allows hemagglutinin (HA) cleavage. 
Here we analyzed whether TMPRSS2 and TMPRSS4 are expressed in influenza virus
target cells and support viral spread in the absence of exogenously added
protease (trypsin). We found that transient expression of TMPRSS2 and TMPRSS4
resulted in HA cleavage and trypsin-independent viral spread. Endogenous
expression of TMPRSS2 and TMPRSS4 in cell lines correlated with the ability to
support the spread of influenza virus in the absence of trypsin, indicating that 
these proteases might activate influenza virus in naturally permissive cells.
Indeed, RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown of both TMPRSS2 and TMPRSS4 in
Caco-2 cells, which released fully infectious virus without trypsin treatment,
markedly reduced the spread of influenza virus, demonstrating that these
proteases were responsible for efficient proteolytic activation of HA in this
cell line. Finally, TMPRSS2 was found to be coexpressed with the major receptor
determinant of human influenza viruses, 2,6-linked sialic acids, in human
alveolar epithelium, indicating that viral target cells in the human respiratory 
tract express TMPRSS2. Collectively, our results point toward an important role
for TMPRSS2 and possibly TMPRSS4 in influenza virus replication and highlight the
former protease as a potential therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00239-10 
PMCID: PMC2937781
PMID: 20631123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

