
1. Blood. 2011 Jan 6;117(1):165-74. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-265272. Epub 2010 Sep
27.

STAT6 signaling pathway activated by the cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 induces
expression of the Epstein-Barr virus-encoded protein LMP-1 in absence of EBNA-2: 
implications for the type II EBV latent gene expression in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Kis LL(1), Gerasimcik N, Salamon D, Persson EK, Nagy N, Klein G, Severinson E,
Klein E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. lorand.kis@karolinska.se

In line with the B-lymphotropic nature of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), the virus is 
present in several types of B-cell lymphomas. EBV expresses a different set of
latent genes in the associated tumors, such as EBV nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA-1) and
latent membrane proteins (LMPs; type II latency) in classical Hodgkin lymphomas
(HLs). We previously reported that exposure of in vitro EBV-converted, HL-derived
cell line KMH2-EBV to CD40-ligand and interleukin-4 (IL-4) induced the expression
of LMP-1. Here, we show that exposure to IL-4 or IL-13 alone induced LMP-1 in the
absence of EBNA-2. Induction of LMP-1 by IL-4 and IL-13 was mediated by the
signal transducer signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) and 
a newly defined high-affinity STAT6-binding site in the LMP-1 promoter. IL-4
induced LMP-1 also in Burkitt lymphoma-derived lines and in tonsillar B cells
infected with the EBNA-2-deficient EBV strain P3HR-1. Furthermore, coculture of
EBV-carrying Burkitt lymphoma cells with activated CD4(+) T cells resulted in the
induction of LMP-1 in the absence of EBNA-2. Because Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells
are known to secrete IL-13, to have constitutively activated STAT6, and to be
closely surrounded by CD4(+) T cells, these mechanisms may be involved in the
expression of LMP-1 in EBV-positive chronic HLs.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-265272 
PMID: 20876453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

