
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 9;107(45):19496-501. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1012344107. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

Identification of a receptor for an extinct virus.

Soll SJ(1), Neil SJ, Bieniasz PD.

Author information: 
(1)The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center,
The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The resurrection of endogenous retroviruses from inactive molecular fossils has
allowed the investigation of interactions between extinct pathogens and their
hosts that occurred millions of years ago. Two such paleoviruses, chimpanzee
endogenous retrovirus-1 and -2 (CERV1 and CERV2), are relatives of modern MLVs
and are found in the genomes of a variety of Old World primates, but are absent
from the human genome. No extant CERV1 and -2 proviruses are known to encode
functional proteins. To investigate the host range restriction of these viruses, 
we attempted to reconstruct functional envelopes by generating consensus genes
and proteins. CERV1 and -2 enveloped MLV particles infected cell lines from a
range of mammalian species. Using CERV2 Env-pseudotyped MLV reporters, we
identified copper transport protein 1 (CTR1) as a receptor that was presumably
used by CERV2 during its ancient exogenous replication in primates. Expression of
human CTR1 was sufficient to confer CERV2 permissiveness on otherwise resistant
hamster cells, and CTR1 knockdown or CuCl(2) treatment specifically inhibited
CERV2 infection of human cells. Mutations in highly conserved CTR1 residues that 
have rendered hamster cells resistant to CERV2 include a unique deletion in a
copper-binding motif. These CERV2 receptor-inactivating mutations in hamster CTR1
are accompanied by apparently compensating changes, including an increased number
of extracellular copper-coordinating residues, and this may represent an
evolutionary barrier to the acquisition of CERV2 resistance in primates.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1012344107 
PMCID: PMC2984158
PMID: 20974973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

