
1. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(6):2793-802. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01818-10. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Tupaia CD81, SR-BI, claudin-1, and occludin support hepatitis C virus infection.

Tong Y(1), Zhu Y, Xia X, Liu Y, Feng Y, Hua X, Chen Z, Ding H, Gao L, Wang Y,
Feitelson MA, Zhao P, Qi ZT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Biodefense,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV)-related research has been hampered by the lack of
appropriate small-animal models. It has been reported that tree shrews, or
tupaias (Tupaia belangeri), can be infected with serum-derived HCV. However,
these reports do not firmly establish the tupaia as a reliable model of HCV
infection. Human CD81, scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI), claudin 1
(CLDN1), and occludin (OCLN) are considered essential receptors or coreceptors
for HCV cell entry. In the present study, the roles of these tupaia orthologs in 
HCV infection were assessed. Both CD81 and SR-BI of tupaia were found to be able 
to bind with HCV envelope protein 2 (E2). In comparison with human CD81, tupaia
CD81 exhibited stronger binding activity with E2 and increased HCV pseudoparticle
(HCVpp) cell entry 2-fold. The 293T cells transfected with tupaia CLDN1 became
susceptible to HCVpp infection. Moreover, simultaneous transfection of the four
tupaia factors into mouse NIH 3T3 cells made the cells susceptible to HCVpp
infection. HCVpp of diverse genotypes were able to infect primary tupaia
hepatocytes (PTHs), and this infection could be blocked by either anti-CD81 or
anti-SR-BI. PTHs could be infected by cell culture-produced HCV (HCVcc) and did
produce infectious progeny virus in culture supernatant. These findings indicate 
that PTHs possess all of the essential factors required for HCV entry and support
the complete HCV infection cycle. This highlights both the mechanisms of
susceptibility of tupaia to HCV infection and the possibility of using tupaia as 
a promising small-animal model in HCV study.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01818-10 
PMCID: PMC3067968
PMID: 21177818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

