
1. J Virol. 2011 Apr;85(7):3046-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02209-10. Epub 2011 Jan 12.

Polyomavirus middle T-antigen is a transmembrane protein that binds signaling
proteins in discrete subcellular membrane sites.

Zhou AY(1), Ichaso N, Adamarek A, Zila V, Forstova J, Dibb NJ, Dilworth SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Transformation Group, Section of Investigative Medicine, IRDB Building,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12
0NN, United Kingdom.

Murine polyomavirus middle T-antigen (MT) induces tumors by mimicking an
activated growth factor receptor. An essential component of this action is a
22-amino-acid hydrophobic region close to the C terminus which locates MT to cell
membranes. Here, we demonstrate that this sequence is a transmembrane domain
(TMD) by showing that a hemagglutinin (HA) tag added to the MT C terminus is
exposed on the outside of the cells, with the N terminus inside. To determine
whether this MT TMD is inserted into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane, we 
added the ER retention signal KDEL to the MT C terminus (MTKDEL). This mutant
protein locates only in the ER, demonstrating that MT does insert into membranes 
solely at this location. In addition, this ER-located MT failed to transform.
Examination of the binding proteins associated with the MTKDEL protein
demonstrated that it associates with PP2A and c-Src but fails to interact with
ShcA, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), and phospholipase C-γ1 (PLC-γ1),
despite being tyrosine phosphorylated. Additional mutant and antibody studies
show that MT binding to PP2A is probably required for MT to efficiently exit the 
ER and migrate to the plasma membrane though the TMD also plays a role in this
relocation. Overall, these data, together with previous publications, illustrate 
that MT associates with signaling proteins at different sites in its maturation
pathway. MT binds to PP2A in the cytoplasm, to c-Src at the endoplasmic
reticulum, and to ShcA, PI3K, and PLC-γ1 at subsequent locations en route to the 
plasma membrane.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02209-10 
PMCID: PMC3067864
PMID: 21228238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

