
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2011 Sep;165(1):109-22. doi: 10.1007/s12010-011-9237-8. 
Epub 2011 Apr 6.

The binding of hepatitis B virus X protein to glioma-associated oncogene
homologue 1 and its biological characterization in vitro.

Jo BB(1), Jeong MS, Park SY, Cheong J, Jang SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Jangjeon-dong, Geumjeong-gu, Busan, 609-735, South Korea.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein (HBx) is a 17-kDa transcriptional coactivator
that plays a significant role in the regulation of genes involved in inflammation
and cell survival. It has been known to be involved in the development of liver
cancer and alteration of the cellular HBx level may influence the pathogenesis of
HBV-induced liver diseases. The transcription factor GLI1, a member of the
glioma-associated oncogene homologue (GLI) subfamily of Kr√ºppel-like zinc finger 
proteins is involved in signal transduction within the hedgehog (Hh) signaling
pathway, which is involved in the development of many human malignancies. GLI
activation is important for cell proliferation and anti-apoptosis in various
cancers. To investigate whether the transcriptional coactivator HBx binds to the 
zinc finger transcription factor GLI1, recombinant HBx and GLI1 were isolated.
Expression and purification of the HBx and GLI1 proteins were successfully
performed in Escherichia coli. The binding of HBx to GLI1 was detected by surface
plasmon resonance spectroscopy (BIAcore), fluorescence measurement, and a
His-tagged pull-down experiment. After measuring the fluorescence emission
spectra of purified HBx and GLI1, it was found that the interaction of these
proteins is accompanied by significant conformational changes in one or both.
This study provides important clues for the structural identification of signal
transduction pathways involving the HBx and GLI1 proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-011-9237-8 
PMID: 21468632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

