
1. Oncogene. 2011 Sep 22;30(38):4050-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.120. Epub 2011 May 2.

The HTLV-1 Tax protein inhibits formation of stress granules by interacting with 
histone deacetylase 6.

Legros S(1), Boxus M, Gatot JS, Van Lint C, Kruys V, Kettmann R, Twizere JC,
Dequiedt F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, University 
of Li√®ge (ULg), Gembloux, Belgium.

Human T cell leukemia virus type-1 (HTLV-1) is the causative agent of a fatal
adult T-cell leukemia. Through deregulation of multiple cellular signaling
pathways the viral Tax protein has a pivotal role in T-cell transformation. In
response to stressful stimuli, cells mount a cellular stress response to limit
the damage that environmental forces inflict on DNA or proteins. During stress
response, cells postpone the translation of most cellular mRNAs, which are
gathered into cytoplasmic mRNA-silencing foci called stress granules (SGs) and
allocate their available resources towards the production of dedicated
stress-management proteins. Here we demonstrate that Tax controls the formation
of SGs and interferes with the cellular stress response pathway. In agreement
with previous reports, we observed that Tax relocates from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm in response to environmental stress. We found that the presence of Tax 
in the cytoplasm of stressed cells prevents the formation of SGs and counteracts 
the shutoff of specific host proteins. Unexpectedly, nuclear localization of Tax 
promotes spontaneous aggregation of SGs, even in the absence of stress. Mutant
analysis revealed that the SG inhibitory capacity of Tax is independent of its
transcriptional abilities but relies on its interaction with histone deacetylase 
6, a critical component of SGs. Importantly, the stress-protective effect of Tax 
was also observed in the context of HTLV-1 infected cells, which were shown to be
less prone to form SGs and undergo apoptosis under arsenite exposure. These
observations identify Tax as the first virally encoded inhibitory component of
SGs and unravel a new strategy developed by HTLV-1 to deregulate normal cell
processes. We postulate that inhibition of the stress response pathway by Tax
would favor cell survival under stressful conditions and may have an important
role in HTLV-1-induced cellular transformation.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2011.120 
PMID: 21532619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

