
1. J Virol. 2011 Jul;85(14):6867-81. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00229-11. Epub 2011 May 4.

HIV-1 Nef disrupts intracellular trafficking of major histocompatibility complex 
class I, CD4, CD8, and CD28 by distinct pathways that share common elements.

Leonard JA(1), Filzen T, Carter CC, Schaefer M, Collins KL.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

The Nef protein is an important HIV virulence factor that promotes the
degradation of host proteins to augment virus production and facilitate immune
evasion. The best-characterized targets of Nef are major histocompatibility
complex class I (MHC-I) and CD4, but Nef also has been reported to target several
other proteins, including CD8β, CD28, CD80, CD86, and CD1d. To compare and
contrast the effects of Nef on each protein, we constructed a panel of chimeric
proteins in which the extracellular and transmembrane regions of the MHC-I allele
HLA-A2 were fused to the cytoplasmic tails of CD4, CD28, CD8β, CD80, CD86, and
CD1d. We found that Nef coprecipitated with and disrupted the expression of
molecules with cytoplasmic tails from MHC-I HLA-A2, CD4, CD8β, and CD28, but Nef 
did not bind to or alter the expression of molecules with cytoplasmic tails from 
CD80, CD86, and CD1d. In addition, we used short interfering RNA (siRNA)
knockdown and coprecipitation experiments to implicate AP-1 as a cellular
cofactor for Nef in the downmodulation of both CD28 and CD8β. The interaction
with AP-1 required for CD28 and CD8β differed from the AP-1 interaction required 
for MHC-I downmodulation in that it was mediated through the dileucine motif
within Nef (LL(164,165)AA) and did not require the tyrosine binding pocket of the
AP-1 μ subunit. In addition, we demonstrate a requirement for β-COP as a cellular
cofactor for Nef that was necessary for the degradation of targeted molecules
HLA-A2, CD4, and CD8. These studies provide important new information on the
similarities and differences with which Nef affects intracellular trafficking and
help focus future research on the best potential pharmaceutical targets.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00229-11 
PMCID: PMC3126561
PMID: 21543478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

