
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 1;286(26):22943-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.201194. Epub 2011
May 9.

Cyclin K inhibits HIV-1 gene expression and replication by interfering with
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9)-cyclin T1 interaction in Nef-dependent manner.

Khan SZ(1), Mitra D.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) exploits a number of host cellular factors
for successful survival and propagation. The viral protein Nef plays an important
role in HIV-1 pathogenesis by interacting with various cellular proteins. In the 
present work, we identified Cyclin K (CycK) as a novel Nef-interacting protein,
and for the first time, we showed that CycK inhibits HIV-1 gene expression and
replication in a Nef-dependent manner. The positive elongation factor b complex
comprising cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and Cyclin T1 is a critical cellular 
complex required for viral gene expression and replication. Enhanced expression
of CycK in the presence of Nef induced CycK-CDK9 binding, which prevented
CDK9-Cyclin T1 complex formation and nuclear translocation of CDK9, resulting in 
inhibition of HIV-1 long terminal repeat-driven gene expression. Furthermore,
this effect of CycK was not observed with Nef-deleted virus, indicating the
importance of Nef in this phenomenon. Finally, silencing of CycK in
HIV-1-infected cells resulted in increased translocation of CDK9 into the
nucleus, leading to increased viral gene expression and replication. These data
also suggest that endogenous CycK might act as an inhibitory factor for HIV-1
gene expression and replication in T-cells. Thus, our results clearly demonstrate
that CycK utilizes HIV-1 Nef protein to displace CycT1 from the positive
elongation factor b complex, resulting in inhibition of HIV-1 gene expression and
replication.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.201194 
PMCID: PMC3123062
PMID: 21555514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

