
1. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(17):8940-53. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00569-11. Epub 2011 Jun 22.

Cellular transcription factor Oct-1 interacts with the Epstein-Barr virus BRLF1
protein to promote disruption of viral latency.

Robinson AR(1), Kwek SS, Hagemeier SR, Wille CK, Kenney SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology (McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research), University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent-to-lytic switch is an essential part of the
viral life cycle, but the cellular factors that promote viral reactivation are
not well defined. In this report, we demonstrate that the cellular transcription 
factor Oct-1 cooperates with the EBV immediate-early protein BRLF1 (R, Rta) to
induce lytic viral reactivation. We show that cotransfected Oct-1 enhances the
ability of BRLF1 to activate lytic gene expression in 293 cells stably infected
with a BRLF1-defective EBV mutant (BRLF1-stop) and that Oct-1 increases
BRLF1-mediated activation of lytic EBV promoters in reporter gene assays. We find
that Oct-1 interacts directly with BRLF1 in vitro and that a mutant BRLF1 protein
(the M140A mutant) attenuated for the ability to interact with Oct-1 in vitro is 
also resistant to Oct-1-mediated transcriptional enhancement in 293 BRLF1-stop
cells. Furthermore, we show that cotransfected Oct-1 augments BRLF1 binding to a 
variety of lytic EBV promoters in chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
(including the BZLF1, BMRF1, and SM promoters) and that BRLF1 tethers Oct-1 to
lytic EBV promoters. In addition, we demonstrate that an Oct-1 mutant defective
in DNA binding (the S335D mutant) still retains the ability to enhance BRLF1
transcriptional effects. Finally, we show that knockdown of endogenous Oct-1
expression reduces the level of constitutive lytic EBV gene expression in both
EBV-positive B-cell and EBV-positive epithelial cell lines. These results suggest
that Oct-1 acts as a positive regulator of EBV lytic gene expression and that
this effect is at least partially mediated through its interaction with the viral
protein BRLF1.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00569-11 
PMCID: PMC3165789
PMID: 21697476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

