
1. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(17):8870-83. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00059-11. Epub 2011 Jun 22.

Hepatitis C virus stimulates the phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase III
alpha-dependent phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate production that is essential for
its replication.

Berger KL(1), Kelly SM, Jordan TX, Tartell MA, Randall G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase III alpha (PI4KA) is an essential cofactor of
hepatitis C virus (HCV) replication. We initiated this study to determine whether
HCV directly engages PI4KA to establish its replication. PI4KA kinase activity
was found to be absolutely required for HCV replication using a small interfering
RNA transcomplementation assay. Moreover, HCV infection or subgenomic HCV
replicons produced a dramatic increase in phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PI4P)
accumulation throughout the cytoplasm, which partially colocalized with the
endoplasmic reticulum. In contrast, the majority of PI4P accumulated at the Golgi
bodies in uninfected cells. The increase in PI4P was not observed after infection
with UV-inactivated HCV and did not reflect changes in PI4KA protein or RNA
abundance. In an analysis of U2OS cell lines with inducible expression of the HCV
polyprotein or individual viral proteins, viral polyprotein expression resulted
in enhanced cytoplasmic PI4P production. Increased PI4P accumulation following
HCV protein expression was precluded by silencing the expression of PI4KA, but
not the related PI4KB. Silencing PI4KA also resulted in aberrant agglomeration of
viral replicase proteins, including NS5A, NS5B, and NS3. NS5A alone, but not
other viral proteins, stimulated PI4P production in vivo and enhanced PI4KA
kinase activity in vitro. Lastly, PI4KA coimmunoprecipitated with NS5A from
infected Huh-7.5 cells and from dually transfected 293T cells. In sum, these
results suggest that HCV NS5A modulation of PI4KA-dependent PI4P production
influences replication complex formation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00059-11 
PMCID: PMC3165839
PMID: 21697487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

