
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021176. Epub 2011 Jun 20.

Id1 interacts and stabilizes the Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1
(LMP1) in nasopharyngeal epithelial cells.

Hau PM(1), Tsang CM, Yip YL, Huen MS, Tsao SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.

The EBV-encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) functions as a constitutive
active form of tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) and activates multiple
downstream signaling pathways similar to CD40 signaling in a ligand-independent
manner. LMP1 expression in EBV-infected cells has been postulated to play an
important role in pathogenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. However, variable
levels of LMP1 expression were detected in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. At present, 
the regulation of LMP1 levels in nasopharyngeal carcinoma is poorly understood.
Here we show that LMP1 mRNAs are transcribed in an EBV-positive nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC) cell line (C666-1) and other EBV-negative nasopharyngeal
carcinoma cells stably re-infected with EBV. The protein levels of LMP1 could
readily be detected after incubation with proteasome inhibitor, MG132 suggesting 
that LMP1 protein is rapidly degraded via proteasome-mediated proteolysis.
Interestingly, we observed that Id1 overexpression could stabilize LMP1 protein
in EBV-infected cells. In contrary, Id1 knockdown significantly reduced LMP1
levels in cells. Co-immunoprecipitation studies revealed that Id1 interacts with 
LMP1 by binding to the CTAR1 domain of LMP1. N-terminal region of Id1 is required
for the interaction with LMP1. Furthermore, binding of Id1 to LMP1 suppressed
polyubiquitination of LMP1 and may be involved in stabilization of LMP1 in
EBV-infected nasopharyngeal epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021176 
PMCID: PMC3118807
PMID: 21701587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

