
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Jul;7(7):e1002138. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002138. Epub 2011
Jul 21.

An interaction between KSHV ORF57 and UIF provides mRNA-adaptor redundancy in
herpesvirus intronless mRNA export.

Jackson BR(1), Boyne JR, Noerenberg M, Taylor A, Hautbergue GM, Walsh MJ, Wheat
R, Blackbourn DJ, Wilson SA, Whitehouse A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds,
United Kingdom.

The hTREX complex mediates cellular bulk mRNA nuclear export by recruiting the
nuclear export factor, TAP, via a direct interaction with the export adaptor,
Aly. Intriguingly however, depletion of Aly only leads to a modest reduction in
cellular mRNA nuclear export, suggesting the existence of additional mRNA nuclear
export adaptor proteins. In order to efficiently export Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) intronless mRNAs from the nucleus, the KSHV
ORF57 protein recruits hTREX onto viral intronless mRNAs allowing access to the
TAP-mediated export pathway. Similarly however, depletion of Aly only leads to a 
modest reduction in the nuclear export of KSHV intronless mRNAs. Herein, we
identify a novel interaction between ORF57 and the cellular protein, UIF. We
provide the first evidence that the ORF57-UIF interaction enables the recruitment
of hTREX and TAP to KSHV intronless mRNAs in Aly-depleted cells. Strikingly,
depletion of both Aly and UIF inhibits the formation of an ORF57-mediated nuclear
export competent ribonucleoprotein particle and consequently prevents
ORF57-mediated mRNA nuclear export and KSHV protein production. Importantly,
these findings highlight that redundancy exists in the eukaryotic system for
certain hTREX components involved in the mRNA nuclear export of intronless KSHV
mRNAs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002138 
PMCID: PMC3141038
PMID: 21814512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

