
1. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(22):11928-37. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00758-11. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Human cytomegalovirus infection causes degradation of Sp100 proteins that
suppress viral gene expression.

Kim YE(1), Lee JH, Kim ET, Shin HJ, Gu SY, Seol HS, Ling PD, Lee CH, Ahn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 300 Cheoncheondong Jangangu, Suwon,
Gyeonggido 440-746, Republic of Korea.

The interferon-inducible Sp100 proteins are thought to play roles in the
chromatin pathway and in transcriptional regulation. Sp100A, the smallest
isoform, is one of the major components of PML nuclear bodies (NBs) that exhibit 
intrinsic antiviral activity against several viruses. Since PML NBs are disrupted
by the immediate-early 1 (IE1) protein during human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
infection, the modulation of Sp100 protein expression or activity during
infection has been suggested. Here, we show that Sp100 proteins are lost largely 
in the late stages of HCMV infection. This event required viral gene expression
and involved posttranscriptional control. The mutant virus with deletion of the
sequence for IE1 (CR208) did not have Sp100 loss. In CR208 infection, PML
depletion by RNA interference abrogated the accumulation of SUMO-modified Sp100A 
and of certain high-molecular-weight Sp100 isoforms but did not significantly
affect unmodified Sp100A, suggesting that the IE1-induced disruption of PML NBs
is not sufficient for the complete loss of Sp100 proteins. Sp100A loss was found 
to require proteasome activity. Depletion of all Sp100 proteins by RNA silencing 
enhanced HCMV replication and major IE (MIE) gene expression. Sp100 knockdown
enhanced the acetylation level of histones associated with the MIE promoter,
demonstrating that the repressive effect of Sp100 proteins may involve, at least 
in part, the epigenetic control of the MIE promoter. Sp100A was found to interact
directly with IE1 through the N-terminal dimerization domain. These findings
indicate that the IE1-dependent loss of Sp100 proteins during HCMV infection may 
represent an important requirement for efficient viral growth.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00758-11 
PMCID: PMC3209270
PMID: 21880768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

