
1. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(22):11742-51. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05351-11. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Host-soluble galectin-1 promotes HIV-1 replication through a direct interaction
with glycans of viral gp120 and host CD4.

St-Pierre C(1), Manya H, Ouellet M, Clark GF, Endo T, Tremblay MJ, Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Glycobiology and Bioimaging Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University,
2705 Boul. Laurier, Quebec G1V 4G2, Canada.

Sexual transmission of HIV-1 requires virus adsorption to a target cell,
typically a CD4(+) T lymphocyte residing in the lamina propria, beneath the
epithelium. To escape the mucosal clearance system and reach its target cells,
HIV-1 has evolved strategies to circumvent deleterious host factors. Galectin-1, 
a soluble lectin found in the underlayers of the epithelium, increases HIV-1
infectivity by accelerating its binding to susceptible cells. By comparison,
galectin-3, a family member expressed by epithelial cells and part of the mucosal
clearance system, does not perform similarly. We show here that galectin-1
directly binds to HIV-1 in a Î²-galactoside-dependent fashion through recognition 
of clusters of N-linked glycans on the viral envelope gp120. Unexpectedly, this
preferential binding of galectin-1 does not rely on the primary sequence of any
particular glycans. Instead, glycan clustering arising from the tertiary
structure of gp120 hinders its binding by galectin-3. Increased polyvalency of a 
specific ligand epitope is a common strategy for glycans to increase their
avidity for lectins. In this peculiar occurrence, glycan clustering is instead
exploited to prevent binding of gp120 by galectin-3, which would lead to a
biological dead-end for the virus. Our data also suggest that galectin-1 binds
preferentially to CD4, the host receptor for gp120. Together, these results
suggest that HIV-1 exploits galectin-1 to enhance gp120-CD4 interactions, thereby
promoting virus attachment and infection events. Since viral adhesion is a
rate-limiting step for HIV-1 entry, modulation of the gp120 interaction with
galectin-1 could thus represent a novel approach for the prevention of HIV-1
transmission.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05351-11 
PMCID: PMC3209312
PMID: 21880749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

