
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002169. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002169. Epub 2011
Sep 8.

Disruption of TLR3 signaling due to cleavage of TRIF by the hepatitis A virus
protease-polymerase processing intermediate, 3CD.

Qu L(1), Feng Z, Yamane D, Liang Y, Lanford RE, Li K, Lemon SM.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and the Division of Infectious
Diseases, Department of Medicine, The University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and cytosolic RIG-I-like helicases (RIG-I and MDA5)
sense viral RNAs and activate innate immune signaling pathways that induce
expression of interferon (IFN) through specific adaptor proteins, TIR
domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon-β (TRIF), and mitochondrial
antiviral signaling protein (MAVS), respectively. Previously, we demonstrated
that hepatitis A virus (HAV), a unique hepatotropic human picornavirus, disrupts 
RIG-I/MDA5 signaling by targeting MAVS for cleavage by 3ABC, a precursor of the
sole HAV protease, 3C(pro), that is derived by auto-processing of the P3 (3ABCD) 
segment of the viral polyprotein. Here, we show that HAV also disrupts TLR3
signaling, inhibiting poly(I:C)-stimulated dimerization of IFN regulatory factor 
3 (IRF-3), IRF-3 translocation to the nucleus, and IFN-β promoter activation, by 
targeting TRIF for degradation by a distinct 3ABCD processing intermediate, the
3CD protease-polymerase precursor. TRIF is proteolytically cleaved by 3CD, but
not by the mature 3C(pro) protease or the 3ABC precursor that degrades MAVS.
3CD-mediated degradation of TRIF depends on both the cysteine protease activity
of 3C(pro) and downstream 3D(pol) sequence, but not 3D(pol) polymerase activity. 
Cleavage occurs at two non-canonical 3C(pro) recognition sequences in TRIF, and
involves a hierarchical process in which primary cleavage at Gln-554 is a
prerequisite for scission at Gln-190. The results of mutational studies indicate 
that 3D(pol) sequence modulates the substrate specificity of the upstream 3C(pro)
protease when fused to it in cis in 3CD, allowing 3CD to target cleavage sites
not normally recognized by 3C(pro). HAV thus disrupts both RIG-I/MDA5 and TLR3
signaling pathways through cleavage of essential adaptor proteins by two distinct
protease precursors derived from the common 3ABCD polyprotein processing
intermediate.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002169 
PMCID: PMC3169542
PMID: 21931545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

