
1. J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(23):12124-33. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05478-11. Epub 2011 Sep 21.

Localization of sequences in a protein (ORF2) encoded by the latency-related gene
of bovine herpesvirus 1 that inhibits apoptosis and interferes with
Notch1-mediated trans-activation of the bICP0 promoter.

Sinani D(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences & Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68583-0900, USA.

Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) infection induces clinical symptoms in the upper
respiratory tract, inhibits immune responses, and can result in life-threatening 
secondary bacterial infections. Following acute infection, BHV-1 establishes
latency in sensory neurons within trigeminal ganglia. Periodically, reactivation 
from latency occurs, resulting in virus transmission. The latency-related (LR)
RNA is abundantly expressed in latently infected sensory neurons, suggesting that
LR gene products regulate the latency-reactivation cycle. An LR mutant virus with
stop codons at the amino terminus of the first open reading frame (ORF) in the LR
gene (ORF2) does not reactivate from latency, in part because it induces higher
levels of apoptosis in infected neurons. ORF2 inhibits apoptosis in transiently
transfected cells, suggesting that it plays an important role in the
latency-reactivation cycle. ORF2 also interacts with Notch1 or Notch3 and
consequently inhibits their ability to trans-activate the bICP0 early and
glycoprotein C promoters. In this study, we identified ORF2 sequences that were
necessary for inhibiting cold shock-induced apoptosis or Notch1-mediated
trans-activation of the bICP0 early promoter and stimulation of productive
infection. Relative to ORF2 sequences necessary for inhibiting apoptosis,
distinct domains in ORF2 were important for interfering with Notch1-mediated
trans-activation. Five consensus protein kinase A and/or protein kinase C
phosphorylation sites within ORF2 regulate the steady-state levels of ORF2 in
transfected cells. A nuclear localization signal in ORF2 was necessary for
inhibiting Notch1-mediated trans-activation but not apoptosis. In summary, ORF2
has more than one functional domain that regulates its stability and functional
properties.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05478-11 
PMCID: PMC3209353
PMID: 21937659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

