
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 25;286(47):40974-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.290874. Epub
2011 Sep 21.

Binding site specificity and factor redundancy in activator protein-1-driven
human papillomavirus chromatin-dependent transcription.

Wang WM(1), Wu SY, Lee AY, Chiang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Activator protein-1 (AP-1) regulates diverse gene responses triggered by
environmental cues and virus-induced cellular stress. Although many signaling
events leading to AP-1 activation have been described, the fundamental features
underlying binding site selection and factor recruitment of dimeric AP-1
complexes to their target genes remain mostly uncharacterized. Using recombinant 
full-length human AP-1 dimers formed between c-Jun and Fos family members (c-Fos,
FosB, Fra-1, Fra-2) for DNA binding and transcriptional analysis, we found that
each of these AP-1 complex exhibits differential activity for distinct
non-consensus AP-1 sites present in human papillomavirus (HPV), and each AP-1
complex is capable of activating transcription from in vitro-reconstituted HPV
chromatin in a p300- and acetyl-CoA-dependent manner. Transcription from HPV
chromatin requires AP-1-dependent and contact-driven recruitment of p300.
Acetylation of dimeric AP-1 complexes by p300 enhances AP-1 binding to DNA. Using
a human C-33A cervical cancer-derived cell line harboring the episomal HPV type
11 genome, we illustrate binding site selectivity recognized by c-Jun, JunB,
JunD, and various Fos family members in a combinatorial and unique pattern,
highlighting the diversity and importance of non-canonical binding site
recognition by various AP-1 family proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.290874 
PMCID: PMC3220474
PMID: 21937452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

