
1. J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(23):12241-53. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05487-11. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

DNA mismatch repair proteins are required for efficient herpes simplex virus 1
replication.

Mohni KN(1), Mastrocola AS, Bai P, Weller SK, Heinen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Microbial, and Structural Biology and Molecular
Biology and Biochemistry Graduate Program, University of Connecticut Health
Center, 263 Farmington Ave., Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a double-stranded DNA virus that replicates in 
the nucleus of its human host cell and is known to interact with many cellular
DNA repair proteins. In this study, we examined the role of cellular mismatch
repair (MMR) proteins in the virus life cycle. Both MSH2 and MLH1 are required
for efficient replication of HSV-1 in normal human cells and are localized to
viral replication compartments. In addition, a previously reported interaction
between MSH6 and ICP8 was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation and extended to show
that UL12 is also present in this complex. We also report for the first time that
MLH1 associates with ND10 nuclear bodies and that like other ND10 proteins, MLH1 
is recruited to the incoming genome. Knockdown of MLH1 inhibits immediate-early
viral gene expression. MSH2, on the other hand, which is generally thought to
play a role in mismatch repair at a step prior to that of MLH1, is not recruited 
to incoming genomes and appears to act at a later step in the viral life cycle.
Silencing of MSH2 appears to inhibit early gene expression. Thus, both MLH1 and
MSH2 are required but appear to participate in distinct events in the virus life 
cycle. The observation that MLH1 plays an earlier role in HSV-1 infection than
does MSH2 is surprising and may indicate a novel function for MLH1 distinct from 
its known MSH2-dependent role in mismatch repair.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05487-11 
PMCID: PMC3209375
PMID: 21957315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

