
1. Oncol Rep. 2012 Jan;27(1):151-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1489. Epub 2011 Oct 4.

Interaction of LHBs with C53 promotes hepatocyte mitotic entry: A novel mechanism
for HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma.

Lei Y(1), Liu H, Yang Y, Wang X, Ren N, Li B, Liu S, Cheng J, Fu X, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Wound Healing and Cell Biology Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital, and 
Camital Medical University, Beijing 100853, PR China.

The pre-S mutant LHBs, especially the pre-S2 type, is believed to be crucial in
HBV-associated hepatocellular carcinogenesis. However, the mechanism of
HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma is not fully understood. To identify the
mechanism, pre-S2 LHBs-interacting proteins were studied, by performing a yeast
two-hybrid screen of a human liver cDNA library. Screening of the library
resulted in the isolation of several positive clones. Sequencing of the positive 
clones identified the full-length cDNA of the C53 gene. After identiﬁcation of
the interaction, the roles of LHBs on Cdk1, Chk1 activation and mitotic entry
were studied. Screening of the library resulted in the isolation of several
positive clones, that encoded the full-length cDNA of the C53 gene. We found that
C53 interacts with pre-S2 LHBs both in vitro and in vivo, but not with LHBs or
other mutants. The binding of pre-S2 LHBs with C53 causes increased Cdk1
activation and mitotic entry, and the function of Chk1 is partially inhibited by 
the binding of pre-S2 LHBs with C53. Taken together, our results strongly suggest
that the binding of pre-S2 LHBs with C53 is a novel negative regulator of the
checkpoint response. By counteracting C53, pre-S2 LHBs promotes Cdk1 activation
and mitotic entry in unperturbed cell cycle progression and delays the function
of Chk1, which may be a novel potential mechanism for HBV-induced hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC).

DOI: 10.3892/or.2011.1489 
PMID: 21971960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

