
1. J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(24):13420-31. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06088-11. Epub 2011 Oct 5.

Coagulation factor IX mediates serotype-specific binding of species A
adenoviruses to host cells.

Lenman A(1), M체ller S, Nygren MI, Fr채ngsmyr L, Stehle T, Arnberg N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Clinical Microbiology, Ume책 University,
Ume책 90185, Sweden. annasara.lenman@climi.umu.se

Human species A adenoviruses (HAdVs) comprise three serotypes: HAdV-12, -18, and 
-31. These viruses are common pathogens and cause systemic infections that
usually involve the airways and/or intestine. In immunocompromised individuals,
species A adenoviruses in general, and HAdV-31 in particular, cause
life-threatening infections. By combining binding and infection experiments, we
demonstrate that coagulation factor IX (FIX) efficiently enhances binding and
infection by HAdV-18 and HAdV-31, but not by HAdV-12, in epithelial cells
originating from the airways or intestine. This is markedly different from the
mechanism for HAdV-5 and other human adenoviruses, which utilize coagulation
factor X (FX) for infection of host cells. Surface plasmon resonance experiments 
revealed that the affinity of the HAdV-31 hexon-FIX interaction is higher than
that of the HAdV-5 hexon-FX interaction and that the half-lives of these
interactions are profoundly different. Moreover, both HAdV-31-FIX and HAdV-5-FX
complexes bind to heparan sulfate-containing glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) on target 
cells, but binding studies utilizing cells expressing specific GAGs and
GAG-cleaving enzymes revealed differences in GAG dependence and specificity
between these two complexes. These findings add to our understanding of the
intricate infection pathways used by human adenoviruses, and they may contribute 
to better design of HAdV-based vectors for gene and cancer therapy. Furthermore, 
the interaction between the HAdV-31 hexon and FIX may also serve as a target for 
antiviral treatment.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06088-11 
PMCID: PMC3233144
PMID: 21976659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

