
1. J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(24):13019-26. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05942-11. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Measles virus V protein inhibits NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated interleukin-1β
secretion.

Komune N(1), Ichinohe T, Ito M, Yanagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan.

Inflammasomes are cytosolic protein complexes that stimulate the activation of
caspase-1, which in turn induces the secretion of the inflammatory cytokines
Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-18. Recent studies have indicated that the
inflammasome known as the NOD-like-receptor-family, pyrin domain-containing 3
(NLRP3) inflammasome recognizes several RNA viruses, including the influenza and 
encephalomyocarditis viruses, whereas the retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) 
inflammasome may detect vesicular stomatitis virus. We demonstrate that measles
virus (MV) infection induces caspase-1-dependent IL-1β secretion in the human
macrophage-like cell line THP-1. Gene knockdown experiments indicated that IL-1β 
secretion in MV-infected THP-1 cells was mediated by the NLRP3 inflammasome but
not the RIG-I inflammasome. MV produces the nonstructural V protein, which has
been shown to antagonize host innate immune responses. The recombinant MV lacking
the V protein induced more IL-1β than the parental virus. THP-1 cells stably
expressing the V protein suppressed NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated IL-1β secretion. 
Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation assays revealed that the V protein interacts
with NLRP3 through its carboxyl-terminal domain. NLRP3 was located in cytoplasmic
granular structures in THP-1 cells stably expressing the V protein, but upon
inflammasome activation, NLRP3 was redistributed to the perinuclear region, where
it colocalized with the V protein. These results indicate that the V protein of
MV suppresses NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated IL-1β secretion by directly or
indirectly interacting with NLRP3.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05942-11 
PMCID: PMC3233149
PMID: 21994456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

