
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012 Apr;11(4):M111.015313. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.015313.
Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Host cell interactome of HIV-1 Rev includes RNA helicases involved in multiple
facets of virus production.

Naji S(1), Ambrus G, Cimermančič P, Reyes JR, Johnson JR, Filbrandt R, Huber MD, 
Vesely P, Krogan NJ, Yates JR 3rd, Saphire AC, Gerace L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The HIV-1 Rev protein plays a key role in the late phase of virus replication. It
binds to the Rev Response Element found in underspliced HIV mRNAs, and drives
their nuclear export by the CRM1 receptor pathway. Moreover, mounting evidence
suggests that Rev has additional functions in viral replication. Here we employed
proteomics and statistical analysis to identify candidate host cell factors that 
interact with Rev. For this we studied Rev complexes assembled in vitro with
nuclear or cytosolic extracts under conditions emulating various intracellular
environments of Rev. We ranked the protein-protein interactions by combining
several statistical features derived from pairwise comparison of conditions in
which the abundance of the binding partners changed. As a validation set, we
selected the eight DEAD/H box proteins of the RNA helicase family from the
top-ranking 5% of the proteins. These proteins all associate with ectopically
expressed Rev in immunoprecipitates of cultured cells. From gene knockdown
approaches, our work in combination with previous studies indicates that six of
the eight DEAD/H proteins are linked to HIV production in our cell model. In a
more detailed analysis of infected cells where either DDX3X, DDX5, DDX17, or
DDX21 was silenced, we observed distinctive phenotypes for multiple replication
features, variously involving virus particle release, the levels of unspliced and
spliced HIV mRNAs, and the nuclear and cytoplasmic concentrations of these
transcripts. Altogether the work indicates that our top-scoring data set is
enriched in Rev-interacting proteins relevant to HIV replication. Our more
detailed analysis of several Rev-interacting DEAD proteins suggests a complex set
of functions for the helicases in regulation of HIV mRNAs. The strategy used here
for identifying Rev interaction partners should prove effective for analyzing
other viral and cellular proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M111.015313 
PMCID: PMC3322577
PMID: 22174317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

