
1. J Virol. 2012 Feb;86(4):2011-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06776-11. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

The cellular protein SPT6 is required for efficient replication of human
cytomegalovirus.

Cygnar D(1), Hagemeier S, Kronemann D, Bresnahan WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
USA.

The human cytomegalovirus tegument protein UL69 has been shown to be required for
efficient viral replication at low multiplicities of infection. Several functions
have been associated with UL69, including its ability to regulate cell cycle
progression, translation, and the export of viral transcripts from the nucleus to
the cytoplasm. However, it remains unclear which, if any, of these activities
contribute to the phenotype observed with the UL69 deletion mutant. UL69 has been
shown to interact with the cellular protein SPT6. The functional significance of 
this interaction has never been examined in the context of an infection. To
address this, we generated UL69 mutant viruses that were unable to interact with 
SPT6 and determined what effect these mutations had on virus replication.
Abolishing UL69's ability to interact with the SPT6 protein inhibited virus
replication to levels indistinguishable from those observed following infection
with the UL69 deletion mutant. Surprisingly, abolishing UL69's interaction with
SPT6 also resulted in the impairment of UL69 shuttling activity. Finally, we
demonstrate that inhibition of SPT6 expression by short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
knockdown inhibits wild-type virus replication. Taken together, our results
demonstrate that UL69's ability to interact with SPT6 plays a critical role in
viral replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06776-11 
PMCID: PMC3302422
PMID: 22171252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

