
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Apr;40(8):3548-62. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1224. Epub 2011
Dec 19.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 Tat activates NF-κB via physical interaction with 
IκB-α and p65.

Fiume G(1), Vecchio E, De Laurentiis A, Trimboli F, Palmieri C, Pisano A, Falcone
C, Pontoriero M, Rossi A, Scialdone A, Fasanella Masci F, Scala G, Quinto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Catanzaro
Magna Graecia, Viale Europa-Germaneto, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.

Nuclear factor (NF)-κB is a master regulator of pro-inflammatory genes and is
upregulated in human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) infection. Mechanisms
underlying the NF-κB deregulation by HIV-1 are relevant for immune dysfunction in
AIDS. We report that in single round HIV-1 infection, or single-pulse PMA
stimulation, the HIV-1 Tat transactivator activated NF-κB by hijacking the
inhibitor IκB-α and by preventing the repressor binding to the NF-κB complex.
Moreover, Tat associated with the p65 subunit of NF-κB and increased the p65
DNA-binding affinity and transcriptional activity. The arginine- and
cysteine-rich domains of Tat were required for IκB-α and p65 association,
respectively, and for sustaining the NF-κB activity. Among an array of
NF-κB-responsive genes, Tat mostly activated the MIP-1α expression in a
p65-dependent manner, and bound to the MIP-1α NF-κB enhancer thus promoting the
recruitment of p65 with displacement of IκB-α; similar findings were obtained for
the NF-κB-responsive genes CSF3, LTA, NFKBIA and TLR2. Our results support a
novel mechanism of NF-κB activation via physical interaction of Tat with IκB-α
and p65, and may contribute to further insights into the deregulation of the
inflammatory response by HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr1224 
PMCID: PMC3333881
PMID: 22187158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

