
1. Nature. 2011 Dec 21;481(7381):365-70. doi: 10.1038/nature10719.

Global landscape of HIV-human protein complexes.

Jäger S(1), Cimermancic P, Gulbahce N, Johnson JR, McGovern KE, Clarke SC, Shales
M, Mercenne G, Pache L, Li K, Hernandez H, Jang GM, Roth SL, Akiva E, Marlett J, 
Stephens M, D'Orso I, Fernandes J, Fahey M, Mahon C, O'Donoghue AJ, Todorovic A, 
Morris JH, Maltby DA, Alber T, Cagney G, Bushman FD, Young JA, Chanda SK,
Sundquist WI, Kortemme T, Hernandez RD, Craik CS, Burlingame A, Sali A, Frankel
AD, Krogan NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California,
San Francisco, California 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012 Feb;10(2):81.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has a small genome and therefore relies
heavily on the host cellular machinery to replicate. Identifying which host
proteins and complexes come into physical contact with the viral proteins is
crucial for a comprehensive understanding of how HIV rewires the host's cellular 
machinery during the course of infection. Here we report the use of affinity
tagging and purification mass spectrometry to determine systematically the
physical interactions of all 18 HIV-1 proteins and polyproteins with host
proteins in two different human cell lines (HEK293 and Jurkat). Using a
quantitative scoring system that we call MiST, we identified with high confidence
497 HIV-human protein-protein interactions involving 435 individual human
proteins, with ∼40% of the interactions being identified in both cell types. We
found that the host proteins hijacked by HIV, especially those found interacting 
in both cell types, are highly conserved across primates. We uncovered a number
of host complexes targeted by viral proteins, including the finding that HIV
protease cleaves eIF3d, a subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3. 
This host protein is one of eleven identified in this analysis that act to
inhibit HIV replication. This data set facilitates a more comprehensive and
detailed understanding of how the host machinery is manipulated during the course
of HIV infection.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10719 
PMCID: PMC3310911
PMID: 22190034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

