
1. FEBS J. 2012 Apr;279(7):1220-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08514.x. Epub 2012
Feb 23.

Akt augments the oncogenic potential of the HBx protein of hepatitis B virus by
phosphorylation.

Khattar E(1), Mukherji A, Kumar V.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India.

Hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) is a putative viral oncoprotein that plays an
important role in various cellular processes, including modulation of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signalling pathway. However, the molecular
mechanism of Akt activation remains elusive. Here we show that HBx interacts with
Akt1 kinase and is phosphorylated at serine 31 as indicated by mutational
analysis of the Akt recognition motif (creating the HBxS31A mutant) or
immunoblotting of HBx immunoprecipitates using Akt motif-specific antibody. The
Akt-dependent phosphorylation of HBx was abrogated in the presence of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 or Akt1 gene silencing by
specific siRNA. Co-immunoprecipitation studies provided evidence for HBx-Akt
interaction in a cellular environment. This interaction was also confirmed in
hepatoma HepG2.2.15 cells in which HBx was expressed at physiological levels from
the integrated hepatitis B viral genome. The HBx-Akt interaction was essential
for Akt signalling, and involved displacement of the Akt-bound negative regulator
'C-terminal modulator protein' by HBx. HBx-activated Akt phosphorylated its
downstream target glycogen synthase kinase 3β, leading to stabilization of
β-catenin, while p65 phosphorylation resulted in enhanced promoter recruitment
and expression of target genes encoding cyclin D1 and Bcl-XL. Further, the
oncogenic potential of HBx was significantly augmented in the presence of Akt in 
a soft agar colony formation assay. Together, these results suggest that
oncogenic co-operation between HBx and Akt may be important for cell
proliferation, abrogation of apoptosis and tumorigenic transformation of cells.

© 2012 The Authors Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08514.x 
PMID: 22309289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

