
1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2012;7:827-34. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S27803. Epub 2012 Feb 16.

Ferritin light chain and squamous cell carcinoma antigen 1 are coreceptors for
cellular attachment and entry of hepatitis B virus.

Hao Z(1), Zheng L, Kluwe L, Huang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    Int J Nanomedicine. 2012;7:2209.

Overexpression of squamous cell carcinoma antigen 1 (SCCA1) in hepatitis G2
(HepG2) and Chinese hamster ovary cells can increase hepatitis B virus (HBV)
binding capacity by interacting with the preS1 domain of the HBV surface antigen.
However, the magnitude of increase in binding capacity was higher by several
orders in the former, indicating the existence of additional factor(s) produced
by HepG2 cells, which facilitates HBV attachment. Ferritin light chain (FTL) was 
identified as the sole high hit candidate by screening human liver cDNA library
using a bacterial two-hybrid system with either preS or SCCA1 as the bait.
Subsequent in vitro protein-protein interaction assays confirmed the binding
activity of FTL to both preS and SCCA1, as well as the formation of triple
complex preS-FTL-SCCA1, and narrowed down the binding sites on FTL. In vitro
overexpression of FTL could further enhance HBV attachment in both HepG2 and
Chinese hamster ovary cells, which were already overexpressing SCCA1.
Importantly, in vivo co-expression of human FTL and SCCA1 in mouse liver by means
of tailvein hydrodynamic injection increased serum levels of HBV surface antigen 
transiently 24 hours post challenge with HBV-positive human sera, and a large
amount of HBV core antigen-positive hepatocytes around blood vessels could be
identified by immunohistochemical staining 48 hours post challenge. The data
strongly suggest that FTL and SCCA1 may serve as coreceptors in HBV cellular
attachment and virus entry into hepatocytes.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S27803 
PMCID: PMC3284225
PMID: 22359459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

