
1. J Virol. 2012 Jun;86(11):5974-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00070-12. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus latency-associated nuclear antigen
interacts with multifunctional angiogenin to utilize its antiapoptotic functions.

Paudel N(1), Sadagopan S, Chakraborty S, Sarek G, Ojala PM, Chandran B.

Author information: 
(1)H. M. Bligh Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, North Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is etiologically associated with
the angioproliferative Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). KSHV infection and the expression
of latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA-1) upregulates the angiogenic
multifunctional 123-amino-acid, 14-kDa protein angiogenin (ANG), which is
detected in KS lesions and in KSHV-associated primary effusion lymphoma (PEL)
cells. ANG knockdown or the inhibition of ANG's nuclear translocation resulted in
decreased LANA-1 gene expression and reduced KSHV-infected endothelial and PEL
cell survival (Sadagopan et al., J. Virol. 83:3342-3364, 2009). Further studies
here demonstrate that LANA-1 and ANG colocalize and coimmunoprecipitate in de
novo infected endothelial cells and in latently infected PEL (BCBL-1 and BC-3)
cells. LANA-1 and ANG interaction occurred in the absence of the KSHV genome and 
other viral proteins. In gel filtration chromatography analyses of BC-3 cell
lysates, ANG coeluted with LANA-1, p53, and Mdm2 in high-molecular-weight
fractions, and LANA-1, p53, and Mdm2 also coimmunoprecipitated with ANG. LANA-1, 
ANG, and p53 colocalized in KSHV-infected cells, and colocalization between ANG
and p53 was also observed in LANA-1-negative cells. The deletion constructs of
ANG suggested that the C-terminal region of amino acids 104 to 123 is involved in
LANA-1 and p53 interactions. Silencing ANG or inhibiting its nuclear
translocation resulted in decreased nuclear LANA-1 and ANG levels, decreased
interactions between ANG-LANA-1, ANG-p53, and LANA-1-p53, the induction of p53,
p21, and Bax proteins, the increased cytoplasmic localization of p53, the
downregulation of Bcl-2, the increased cleavage of caspase-3, and the apoptosis
of cells. No such effects were observed in KSHV-negative BJAB cells. The
phosphorylation of p53 at serine 15, which is essential for p53 stabilization and
for p53's apoptotic and cell cycle regulation functions, was increased in BCBL-1 
cells transduced with short hairpin RNA targeting ANG. Together, these studies
suggest that the antiapoptosis observed in KSHV-infected cells and the
suppression of p53 functions are mediated in part by ANG, and KSHV has probably
evolved to utilize angiogenin's multiple functions for the maintenance of its
latency and cell survival. Thus, targeting ANG to induce the apoptosis of cells
latently infected with KSHV is an attractive therapeutic strategy against KSHV
infection and associated malignancies.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00070-12 
PMCID: PMC3372210
PMID: 22438557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

