
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 5;109(23):E1473-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1205991109. Epub 2012 Apr 30.

Cutaneous β-human papillomavirus E6 proteins bind Mastermind-like coactivators
and repress Notch signaling.

Tan MJ(1), White EA, Sowa ME, Harper JW, Aster JC, Howley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.

The Notch signaling pathway is a key determinant in keratinocyte differentiation 
and growth cycle arrest, and has been reported to have a tumor suppressor
function in skin. The papillomavirus life cycle is intricately linked to the
differentiation status of keratinocytes. Papillomaviruses are associated with
benign proliferative epithelial lesions in their respective hosts. Although human
papillomaviruses (HPVs) associated with genital tract lesions have been
extensively studied, studies of the cutaneous HPVs are more limited. In
particular, it is well established that the E6 proteins of high-risk HPVs of the 
α-genus such as HPV16 and HPV18 mediate the degradation of p53 by its association
with the ubiquitin ligase E6AP. In contrast, less is known about the cellular
activities of the cutaneous HPVs of the β-genus. By using an unbiased proteomic
approach, we identify MAML1 and other members of the Notch transcription complex 
as high-confidence cellular interacting proteins of E6 proteins of the β-genus
HPVs and of the bovine papillomavirus type 1 associated with cutaneous
fibropapillomas. We show that bovine papillomavirus type 1 and β-HPV E6 repress
Notch transcriptional activation, and that this repression is dependent on an
interaction with MAML1. Finally, we show that the expression levels of endogenous
Notch target genes are repressed by β-HPV E6 proteins. These findings elucidate a
mechanism of viral antagonism of Notch signaling, and suggest that Notch
signaling is an important epithelial cell pathway target for the β-HPVs.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1205991109 
PMCID: PMC3384212
PMID: 22547818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

