
1. J Virol. 2012 Jul;86(14):7530-43. doi: 10.1128/JVI.07021-11. Epub 2012 May 2.

The human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 tax protein inhibits nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay by interacting with INT6/EIF3E and UPF1.

Mocquet V(1), Neusiedler J, Rende F, Cluet D, Robin JP, Terme JM, Duc Dodon M,
Wittmann J, Morris C, Le Hir H, Ciminale V, Jalinot P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, Unité Mixte de Recherche
5239, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Ecole Normale Supérieure de
Lyon, Lyon, France.

In this report, we analyzed whether the degradation of mRNAs by the
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway was affected in human T-lymphotropic
virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-infected cells. This pathway was indeed strongly inhibited 
in C91PL, HUT102, and MT2 cells, and such an effect was also observed by the sole
expression of the Tax protein in Jurkat and HeLa cells. In line with this
activity, Tax binds INT6/EIF3E (here called INT6), which is a subunit of the
translation initiation factor eukaryotic initiation factor 3 (eIF3) required for 
efficient NMD, as well as the NMD core factor upstream frameshift protein 1
(UPF1). It was also observed that Tax expression alters the morphology of
processing bodies (P-bodies), the cytoplasmic structures which concentrate RNA
degradation factors. The presence of UPF1 in these subcellular compartments was
increased by Tax, whereas that of INT6 was decreased. In line with these effects,
the level of the phosphorylated form of UPF1 was increased in the presence of
Tax. Analysis of several mutants of the viral protein showed that the interaction
with INT6 is necessary for NMD inhibition. The alteration of mRNA stability was
observed to affect viral transcripts, such as that coding for the HTLV-1 basic
leucine zipper factor (HBZ), and also several cellular mRNAs sensitive to the NMD
pathway. Our data indicate that the effect of Tax on viral and cellular gene
expression is not restricted to transcriptional control but can also involve
posttranscriptional regulation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.07021-11 
PMCID: PMC3416306
PMID: 22553336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

