
1. J Virol. 2012 Jul;86(14):7473-83. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00136-12. Epub 2012 May 9.

Ebolavirus requires acid sphingomyelinase activity and plasma membrane
sphingomyelin for infection.

Miller ME(1), Adhikary S, Kolokoltsov AA, Davey RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, USA.

Acid sphingomyelinase (ASMase) converts the lipid sphingomyelin (SM) to
phosphocholine and ceramide and has optimum activity at acidic pH. Normally,
ASMase is located in lysosomes and endosomes, but membrane damage or the
interaction with some bacterial and viral pathogens can trigger its recruitment
to the plasma membrane. Rhinovirus and measles viruses each require ASMase
activity during early stages of infection. Both sphingomyelin and ceramide are
important components of lipid rafts and are potent signaling molecules. Each
plays roles in mediating macropinocytosis, which has been shown to be important
for ebolavirus (EBOV) infection. Here, we investigated the role of ASMase and its
substrate, SM, in EBOV infection. The work was performed at biosafety level 4
with wild-type virus with specificity and mechanistic analysis performed using
virus pseudotypes and virus-like particles. We found that virus particles
strongly associate with the SM-rich regions of the cell membrane and depletion of
SM reduces EBOV infection. ASM-specific drugs and multiple small interfering RNAs
strongly inhibit the infection by EBOV and EBOV glycoprotein pseudotyped viruses 
but not by the pseudotypes bearing the glycoprotein of vesicular stomatitis
virus. Interestingly, the binding of virus-like particles to cells is strongly
associated with surface-localized ASMase as well as SM-enriched sites. Our work
suggests that ASMase activity and SM presence are necessary for efficient
infection of cells by EBOV. The inhibition of this pathway may provide new
avenues for drug treatment.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00136-12 
PMCID: PMC3416309
PMID: 22573858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

