
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(5):e1002690. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002690. Epub 2012 May
10.

Epstein-Barr virus-encoded LMP1 interacts with FGD4 to activate Cdc42 and thereby
promote migration of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Liu HP(1), Chen CC, Wu CC, Huang YC, Liu SC, Liang Y, Chang KP, Chang YS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is closely associated with nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC), a human malignancy notorious for its highly metastatic nature. Among
EBV-encoded genes, latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is expressed in most NPC
tissues and exerts oncogenicity by engaging multiple signaling pathways in a
ligand-independent manner. LMP1 expression also results in actin cytoskeleton
reorganization, which modulates cell morphology and cell motility- cellular
process regulated by RhoGTPases, such as Cdc42. Despite the prominent association
of Cdc42 activation with tumorigenesis, the molecular basis of Cdc42 activation
by LMP1 in NPC cells remains to be elucidated. Here using GST-CBD (active
Cdc42-binding domain) as bait in GST pull-down assays to precipitate active Cdc42
from cell lysates, we demonstrated that LMP1 acts through its transmembrane
domains to preferentially induce Cdc42 activation in various types of epithelial 
cells, including NPC cells. Using RNA interference combined with re-introduction 
experiments, we identified FGD4 (FYVE, RhoGEF and PH domain containing 4) as the 
GEF (guanine nucleotide exchange factor) responsible for the activation of Cdc42 
by LMP1. Serial deletion experiments and co-immunoprecipitation assays further
revealed that ectopically expressed FGD4 modulated LMP1-mediated Cdc42 activation
by interacting with LMP1. Moreover, LMP1, through its transmembrane domains,
directly bound FGD4 and enhanced FGD4 activity toward Cdc42, leading to actin
cytoskeleton rearrangement and increased motility of NPC cells. Depletion of FGD4
or Cdc42 significantly reduced (âˆ¼50%) the LMP1-stimulated cell motility, an
effect that was partially reversed by expression of a constitutively active
mutant of Cdc42. Finally, quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry analyses
showed that FGD4 and LMP1 were expressed in NPC tissues, supporting the potential
physiologically relevance of this mechanism in NPC. Collectively, our results not
only uncover a novel mechanism underlying LMP1-mediated Cdc42 activation, namely 
LMP1 interaction with FGD4, but also functionally link FGD4 to NPC tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002690 
PMCID: PMC3349753
PMID: 22589722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

