
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36837. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036837. Epub 2012 May 15.

Elucidating the mechanisms of influenza virus recognition by Ncr1.

Glasner A(1), Zurunic A, Meningher T, Lenac Rovis T, Tsukerman P, Bar-On Y, Yamin
R, Meyers AF, Mandeboim M, Jonjic S, Mandelboim O.

Author information: 
(1)The Lautenberg Center for General and Tumor Immunology, Institute for Medical 
Research Israel Canada, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem,
Israel.

Natural killer (NK) cells are innate cytotoxic lymphocytes that specialize in the
defense against viral infection and oncogenic transformation. Their action is
tightly regulated by signals derived from inhibitory and activating receptors;
the later include proteins such as the Natural Cytotoxicity Receptors (NCRs:
NKp46, NKp44 and NKp30). Among the NCRs, NKp46 is the only receptor that has a
mouse orthologue named Ncr1. NKp46/Ncr1 is also a unique marker expressed on NK
and on Lymphoid tissue inducer (LTI) cells and it was implicated in the control
of various viral infections, cancer and diabetes. We have previously shown that
human NKp46 recognizes viral hemagglutinin (HA) in a sialic acid-dependent manner
and that the O-glycosylation is essential for the NKp46 binding to viral HA. Here
we studied the molecular interactions between Ncr1 and influenza viruses. We show
that Ncr1 recognizes influenza virus in a sialic acid dependent manner and that
N-glycosylation is important for this binding. Surprisingly we demonstrate that
none of the predicted N-glycosilated residues of Ncr1 are essential for its
binding to influenza virus and we thus conclude that other, yet unidentified
N-glycosilated residues are responsible for its recognition. We have demonstrated
that N glycosylation play little role in the recognition of mouse tumor cell
lines and also showed the in-vivo importance of Ncr1 in the control of influenza 
virus infection by infecting C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice knockout for Ncr1 with
influenza.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036837 
PMCID: PMC3352933
PMID: 22615821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

