
1. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(15):8072-85. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01058-12. Epub 2012 May 23.

Epstein-Barr virus protein kinase BGLF4 targets the nucleus through interaction
with nucleoporins.

Chang CW(1), Lee CP, Huang YH, Yang PW, Wang JT, Chen MR.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute and Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BGLF4 of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) encodes a serine/threonine protein kinase that 
phosphorylates multiple viral and cellular substrates to optimize the cellular
environment for viral DNA replication and the nuclear egress of viral
nucleocapsids. BGLF4 is expressed predominantly in the nucleus at early and late 
stages of virus replication, while a small portion of BGLF4 is distributed in the
cytoplasm at the late stage of virus replication and packaged into the virion.
Here, we analyzed systematically the functional domains crucial for nuclear
localization of BGLF4 and found that both the N and C termini play important
modulating roles. Analysis of amino acid substitution mutants revealed that the C
terminus of BGLF4 does not contain a conventional nuclear localization signal
(NLS). Additionally, deletion of the C-terminal putative helical regions at amino
acids 386 to 393 and 410 to 419 diminished the nuclear translocation of BGLF4,
indicating that the secondary structure of the C terminus is important for the
localization of BGLF4. The green fluorescent protein-fused wild-type or
C-terminal helical regions of BGLF4 associate with phenylalanine/glycine
repeat-containing nucleoporins (Nups) in nuclear envelope fractionation. Both
coimmunoprecipitation and in vitro pull-down assays further demonstrated that
BGLF4 binds to Nup62 and Nup153. Remarkably, nuclear import assay with
permeabilized HeLa cells demonstrated that BGLF4 translocated into nucleus
independent of cytosolic factors. Data presented here suggest that BGLF4 employs 
a novel mechanism through direct interactions with nucleoporins for its nuclear
targeting.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01058-12 
PMCID: PMC3421656
PMID: 22623767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

