
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 12;109(24):9569-74. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1207314109. Epub 2012 May 29.

Identification of the platelet-derived chemokine CXCL4/PF-4 as a broad-spectrum
HIV-1 inhibitor.

Auerbach DJ(1), Lin Y, Miao H, Cimbro R, Difiore MJ, Gianolini ME, Furci L,
Biswas P, Fauci AS, Lusso P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The natural history of HIV-1 infection is highly variable in different
individuals, spanning from a rapidly progressive course to a long-term
asymptomatic infection. A major determinant of the pace of disease progression is
the in vivo level of HIV-1 replication, which is regulated by a complex network
of cytokines and chemokines expressed by immune and inflammatory cells. The
chemokine system is critically involved in the control of HIV-1 replication by
virtue of the role played by specific chemokine receptors, most notably CCR5 and 
CXCR4, as cell-surface coreceptors for HIV-1 entry; hence, the chemokines that
naturally bind such coreceptors act as endogenous inhibitors of HIV-1. Here, we
show that the CXC chemokine CXCL4 (PF-4), the most abundant protein contained
within the Î±-granules of platelets, is a broad-spectrum inhibitor of HIV-1
infection. Unlike other known HIV-suppressive chemokines, CXCL4 inhibits
infection by the majority of primary HIV-1 isolates regardless of their
coreceptor-usage phenotype or genetic subtype. Consistent with the lack of viral 
phenotype specificity, blockade of HIV-1 infection occurs at the level of virus
attachment and entry via a unique mechanism that involves direct interaction of
CXCL4 with the major viral envelope glycoprotein, gp120. The binding site for
CXCL4 was mapped to a region of the gp120 outer domain proximal to the
CD4-binding site. The identification of a platelet-derived chemokine as an
endogenous antiviral factor may have relevance for the pathogenesis and treatment
of HIV-1 infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1207314109 
PMCID: PMC3386099
PMID: 22645343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

