
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 17;287(34):28821-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.375949. Epub
2012 Jun 25.

Multifaceted mechanisms of HIV-1 entry inhibition by human α-defensin.

Demirkhanyan LH(1), Marin M, Padilla-Parra S, Zhan C, Miyauchi K, Jean-Baptiste
M, Novitskiy G, Lu W, Melikyan GB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Emory University Children's Center,
Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

The human neutrophil peptide 1 (HNP-1) is known to block the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection, but the mechanism of inhibition 
is poorly understood. We examined the effect of HNP-1 on HIV-1 entry and fusion
and found that, surprisingly, this α-defensin inhibited multiple steps of virus
entry, including: (i) Env binding to CD4 and coreceptors; (ii) refolding of Env
into the final 6-helix bundle structure; and (iii) productive HIV-1 uptake but
not internalization of endocytic markers. Despite its lectin-like properties,
HNP-1 could bind to Env, CD4, and other host proteins in a glycan- and
serum-independent manner, whereas the fusion inhibitory activity was greatly
attenuated in the presence of human or bovine serum. This demonstrates that
binding of α-defensin to molecules involved in HIV-1 fusion is necessary but not 
sufficient for blocking the virus entry. We therefore propose that oligomeric
forms of defensin, which may be disrupted by serum, contribute to the anti-HIV-1 
activity perhaps through cross-linking virus and/or host glycoproteins. This
notion is supported by the ability of HNP-1 to reduce the mobile fraction of CD4 
and coreceptors in the plasma membrane and to precipitate a core subdomain of Env
in solution. The ability of HNP-1 to block HIV-1 uptake without interfering with 
constitutive endocytosis suggests a novel mechanism for broad activity against
this and other viruses that enter cells through endocytic pathways.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.375949 
PMCID: PMC3436536
PMID: 22733823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

