
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 7;287(37):31242-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.365924. Epub 2012
Jul 5.

Characterization of hepatitis C virus particle subpopulations reveals multiple
usage of the scavenger receptor BI for entry steps.

Dao Thi VL(1), Granier C, Zeisel MB, Gu√©rin M, Mancip J, Granio O, Penin F,
Lavillette D, Bartenschlager R, Baumert TF, Cosset FL, Dreux M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U758, Human Virology Laboratory, EVIR team, Lyon, F-69007, France.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) particles assemble along the very low density lipoprotein
pathway and are released from hepatocytes as entities varying in their degree of 
lipid and apolipoprotein (apo) association as well as buoyant densities. Little
is known about the cell entry pathway of these different HCV particle
subpopulations, which likely occurs by regulated spatiotemporal processes
involving several cell surface molecules. One of these molecules is the scavenger
receptor BI (SR-BI), a receptor for high density lipoprotein that can bind to the
HCV glycoprotein E2. By studying the entry properties of infectious virus
subpopulations differing in their buoyant densities, we show that these HCV
particles utilize SR-BI in a manifold manner. First, SR-BI mediates primary
attachment of HCV particles of intermediate density to cells. These initial
interactions involve apolipoproteins, such as apolipoprotein E, present on the
surface of HCV particles, but not the E2 glycoprotein, suggesting that
lipoprotein components in the virion act as host-derived ligands for important
entry factors such as SR-BI. Second, we found that in contrast to this initial
attachment, SR-BI mediates entry of HCV particles independent of their buoyant
density. This function of SR-BI does not depend on E2/SR-BI interaction but
relies on the lipid transfer activity of SR-BI, probably by facilitating entry
steps along with other HCV entry co-factors. Finally, our results underscore a
third function of SR-BI governed by specific residues in hypervariable region 1
of E2 leading to enhanced cell entry and depending on SR-BI ability to bind to
E2.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.365924 
PMCID: PMC3438956
PMID: 22767607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

