
1. J Proteome Res. 2012 Oct 5;11(10):4803-13. doi: 10.1021/pr2012297. Epub 2012 Aug 
29.

Hepatitis B virus encoded X protein suppresses apoptosis by inhibition of the
caspase-independent pathway.

Liu H(1), Yuan Y, Guo H, Mitchelson K, Zhang K, Xie L, Qin W, Lu Y, Wang J, Guo
Y, Zhou Y, He F.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) encoded X protein (HBx) has been implicated in apoptotic 
and related pathogenic events during hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the
underlying molecular mechanism through which HBx acts is largely unclear. We used
tandem affinity purification under mild conditions to gain insight into the HBx
interactome in HBV-producing HepG2.2.15 cells and identified 49 proteins by mass 
spectrometry that are potentially associated with HBx. Two of the key proteins of
the caspase-independent apoptosis pathway were newly identified,
apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) and the homologous AMID (AIF-homologue
mitochondrion-associated inducer of death). We confirmed the interactions of HBx 
with AIF and with AMID by reciprocal coimmunoprecipitation experiments,
respectively. We observed the expression of HBx-reduced AIF-mediated apoptosis
and HBx colocalization with AIF and AMID, principally in the cytoplasm.
Furthermore, the elevated cytoplasmic levels of HBx could inhibit
mitochondrion-to-nucleus translocation of AIF. Here, we present the first
detailed molecular evidence that HBx can repress apoptosis via inhibition of the 
caspase-independent apoptosis pathway. This inhibition of apoptosis involves the 
repression of the mitochondrion-to-nucleus translocation of AIF, although tests
with AMID were not conclusive. These findings provide important insights into the
new mechanism of the apoptosis inhibition by HBV.

DOI: 10.1021/pr2012297 
PMID: 22871131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

