
1. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(8):e1001376. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001376. Epub 2012 Aug 
14.

The germinal center kinase TNIK is required for canonical NF-κB and JNK signaling
in B-cells by the EBV oncoprotein LMP1 and the CD40 receptor.

Shkoda A(1), Town JA, Griese J, Romio M, Sarioglu H, Knöfel T, Giehler F, Kieser 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit Gene Vectors, Helmholtz Zentrum München-German Research Center
for Environmental Health, München, Germany.

The tumor necrosis factor-receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2)- and
Nck-interacting kinase (TNIK) is a ubiquitously expressed member of the germinal 
center kinase family. The TNIK functions in hematopoietic cells and the role of
TNIK-TRAF interaction remain largely unknown. By functional proteomics we
identified TNIK as interaction partner of the latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1)
signalosome in primary human B-cells infected with the Epstein-Barr tumor virus
(EBV). RNAi-mediated knockdown proved a critical role for TNIK in canonical NF-κB
and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation by the major EBV oncoprotein LMP1
and its cellular counterpart, the B-cell co-stimulatory receptor CD40.
Accordingly, TNIK is mandatory for proliferation and survival of EBV-transformed 
B-cells. TNIK forms an activation-induced complex with the critical signaling
mediators TRAF6, TAK1/TAB2, and IKKβ, and mediates signalosome formation at LMP1.
TNIK directly binds TRAF6, which bridges TNIK's interaction with the C-terminus
of LMP1. Separate TNIK domains are involved in NF-κB and JNK signaling, the
N-terminal TNIK kinase domain being essential for IKKβ/NF-κB and the C-terminus
for JNK activation. We therefore suggest that TNIK orchestrates the bifurcation
of both pathways at the level of the TRAF6-TAK1/TAB2-IKK complex. Our data
establish TNIK as a novel key player in TRAF6-dependent JNK and NF-κB signaling
and a transducer of activating and transforming signals in human B-cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001376 
PMCID: PMC3419181
PMID: 22904686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

