
1. J Virol. 2012 Nov;86(22):12237-50. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01218-12. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 2 phosphorylates s/t-p sites in the hepadnavirus core
protein C-terminal domain and is incorporated into viral capsids.

Ludgate L(1), Ning X, Nguyen DH, Adams C, Mentzer L, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA.

Phosphorylation of the hepadnavirus core protein C-terminal domain (CTD) is
important for viral RNA packaging, reverse transcription, and subcellular
localization. Hepadnavirus capsids also package a cellular kinase. The identity
of the host kinase that phosphorylates the core CTD or gets packaged remains to
be resolved. In particular, both the human hepatitis B virus (HBV) and duck
hepatitis B virus (DHBV) core CTDs harbor several conserved
serine/threonine-proline (S/T-P) sites whose phosphorylation state is known to
regulate CTD functions. We report here that the endogenous kinase in the HBV
capsids was blocked by chemical inhibitors of the cyclin-dependent kinases
(CDKs), in particular, CDK2 inhibitors. The kinase phosphorylated the HBV CTD at 
the serine-proline (S-P) sites. Furthermore, we were able to detect CDK2 in
purified HBV capsids by immunoblotting. Purified CDK2 phosphorylated the S/T-P
sites of the HBV and DHBV CTD in vitro. Inhibitors of CDKs, of CDK2 in
particular, decreased both HBV and DHBV CTD phosphorylation in vivo. Moreover,
CDK2 inhibitors blocked DHBV CTD phosphorylation, specifically at the S/T-P
sites, in a mammalian cell lysate. These results indicate that cellular CDK2
phosphorylates the functionally critical S/T-P sites of the hepadnavirus core CTD
and is incorporated into viral capsids.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01218-12 
PMCID: PMC3486511
PMID: 22951823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

