
1. Cell Signal. 2013 Jan;25(1):33-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.09.011. Epub 2012 
Sep 10.

The LMP2A protein of Epstein-Barr virus regulates phosphorylation of ITSN1 and
Shb adaptors by tyrosine kinases.

Dergai O(1), Dergai M, Skrypkina I, Matskova L, Tsyba L, Gudkova D, Rynditch A.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, 150 Zabolotnogo Street, Kyiv 03680, Ukraine.

Latent Membrane Protein 2A (LMP2A) is an Epstein-Barr virus-encoded protein that 
is important for the maintenance of latent infection. Its activity affects
cellular differentiation, migration, proliferation and B cell survival. LMP2A
resembles a constitutively activated B cell antigen receptor and exploits host
kinases to activate a set of downstream signaling pathways. In the current study 
we demonstrate the interaction of LMP2A with intersectin 1 (ITSN1), a key
endocytic adaptor protein. This interaction occurs via both the N- and C-tails of
LMP2A and is mediated by the SH3 domains of ITSN1. Additionally, we identified
the Shb adaptor and the Syk kinase as novel binding ligands of ITSN1. The Shb
adaptor interacts simultaneously with the phosphorylated tyrosines of LMP2A and
the SH3 domains of ITSN1 and mediates indirect interaction of ITSN1 to LMP2A. Syk
kinase promotes phosphorylation of both ITSN1 and Shb adaptors in
LMP2A-expressing cells. In contrast to ITSN1, Shb phosphorylation depends
additionally on Lyn kinase activity. Considering that Shb and ITSN1 are
implicated in various receptor tyrosine kinase signaling, our results indicate
that LMP2A can affect a number of signaling pathways by regulating the
phosphorylation of the ITSN1 and Shb adaptors.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.09.011 
PMID: 22975684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

