
1. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(23):12806-15. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01002-12. Epub 2012 Sep 12.

An interaction between human papillomavirus 16 E2 and TopBP1 is required for
optimum viral DNA replication and episomal genome establishment.

Donaldson MM(1), Mackintosh LJ, Bodily JM, Dornan ES, Laimins LA, Morgan IM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research,
Glasgow, United Kingdom.

In human papillomavirus DNA replication, the viral protein E2 forms homodimers
and binds to 12-bp palindromic DNA sequences surrounding the origin of DNA
replication. Via a protein-protein interaction, it then recruits the viral
helicase E1 to an A/T-rich origin of replication, whereupon a dihexamer forms,
resulting in DNA replication initiation. In order to carry out DNA replication,
the viral proteins must interact with host factors that are currently not all
known. An attractive cellular candidate for regulating viral replication is
TopBP1, a known interactor of the E2 protein. In mammalian DNA replication,
TopBP1 loads DNA polymerases onto the replicative helicase after the G(1)-to-S
transition, and this process is tightly cell cycle controlled. The direct
interaction between E2 and TopBP1 would allow E2 to bypass this cell cycle
control, resulting in DNA replication more than once per cell cycle, which is a
requirement for the viral life cycle. We report here the generation of an HPV16
E2 mutant compromised in TopBP1 interaction in vivo and demonstrate that this
mutant retains transcriptional activation and repression functions but has
suboptimal DNA replication potential. Introduction of this mutant into a viral
life cycle model results in the failure to establish viral episomes. The results 
present a potential new antiviral target, the E2-TopBP1 interaction, and increase
our understanding of the viral life cycle, suggesting that the E2-TopBP1
interaction is essential.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01002-12 
PMCID: PMC3497701
PMID: 22973044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

