
1. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(24):13445-55. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01682-12. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Interferon-inducible protein Mx1 inhibits influenza virus by interfering with
functional viral ribonucleoprotein complex assembly.

Verhelst J(1), Parthoens E, Schepens B, Fiers W, Saelens X.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.

Mx1 is a GTPase that is part of the antiviral response induced by type I and type
III interferons in the infected host. It inhibits influenza virus infection by
blocking viral transcription and replication, but the molecular mechanism is not 
known. Polymerase basic protein 2 (PB2) and nucleoprotein (NP) were suggested to 
be the possible target of Mx1, but a direct interaction between Mx1 and any of
the viral proteins has not been reported. We investigated the interplay between
Mx1, NP, and PB2 to identify the mechanism of Mx1's antiviral activity. We found 
that Mx1 inhibits the PB2-NP interaction, and the strength of this inhibition
correlated with a decrease in viral polymerase activity. Inhibition of the PB2-NP
interaction is an active process requiring enzymatically active Mx1. We also
demonstrate that Mx1 interacts with the viral proteins NP and PB2, which
indicates that Mx1 protein has a direct effect on the viral ribonucleoprotein
complex. In a minireplicon system, avian-like NP from swine virus isolates was
more sensitive to inhibition by murine Mx1 than NP from human influenza A virus
isolates. Likewise, murine Mx1 displaced avian NP from the viral
ribonucleoprotein complex more easily than human NP. The stronger resistance of
the A/H1N1 pandemic 2009 virus against Mx1 also correlated with reduced
inhibition of the PB2-NP interaction. Our findings support a model in which Mx1
interacts with the influenza ribonucleoprotein complex and interferes with its
assembly by disturbing the PB2-NP interaction.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01682-12 
PMCID: PMC3503048
PMID: 23015724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

