
1. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(23):13025-37. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01785-12. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Cytosolic phospholipase A2 gamma is involved in hepatitis C virus replication and
assembly.

Xu S(1), Pei R, Guo M, Han Q, Lai J, Wang Y, Wu C, Zhou Y, Lu M, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

Similar to other positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses, hepatitis C virus
(HCV) replicates its genome in a remodeled intracellular membranous structure
known as the membranous web (MW). To date, the process of MW formation remains
unclear. It is generally acknowledged that HCV nonstructural protein 4B (NS4B)
can induce MW formation through interaction with the cytosolic endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) membrane. Many host proteins, such as phosphatidylinositol
4-kinase IIIα (PI4KIIIα), have been identified as critical factors required for
this process. We now report a new factor, the cytosolic phospholipase A2 gamma
(PLA2G4C), which contributes to MW formation, HCV replication, and assembly. The 
PLA2G4C gene was identified as a host gene with upregulated expression upon HCV
infection. Knockdown of PLA2G4C in HCV-infected cells or HCV replicon-containing 
cells by small interfering RNA (siRNA) significantly suppressed HCV replication
and assembly. In addition, the chemical inhibitor methyl arachidonyl
fluorophosphonate (MAFP), which specifically inhibits PLA2, reduced HCV
replication and assembly. Electron microscopy demonstrated that MW structure
formation was defective after PLA2G4C knockdown in HCV replicon-containing cells.
Further analysis by immunostaining and immunoprecipitation assays indicated that 
PLA2G4C colocalized with the HCV proteins NS4B and NS5A in cells infected with
JFH-1 and interacted with NS4B. In addition, PLA2G4C was able to transport the
HCV nonstructural proteins from replication sites to lipid droplets, the site for
HCV assembly. These data suggest that PLA2G4C plays an important role in the HCV 
life cycle and might represent a potential target for anti-HCV therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01785-12 
PMCID: PMC3497680
PMID: 23015700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

