
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002929. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002929. Epub 2012
Sep 27.

Complexes of vesicular stomatitis virus matrix protein with host Rae1 and Nup98
involved in inhibition of host transcription.

Rajani KR(1), Pettit Kneller EL, McKenzie MO, Horita DA, Chou JW, Lyles DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston Salem,
North Carolina, USA.

Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) suppresses antiviral responses in infected cells
by inhibiting host gene expression at multiple levels, including transcription,
nuclear cytoplasmic transport, and translation. The inhibition of host gene
expression is due to the activity of the viral matrix (M) protein. Previous
studies have shown that M protein interacts with host proteins Rae1 and Nup98
that have been implicated in regulating nuclear-cytoplasmic transport. However,
Rae1 function is not essential for host mRNA transport, raising the question of
how interaction of a viral protein with a host protein that is not essential for 
gene expression causes a global inhibition at multiple levels. We tested the
hypothesis that there may be multiple M protein-Rae1 complexes involved in
inhibiting host gene expression at multiple levels. Using size exclusion
chromatography and sedimentation velocity analysis, it was determined that Rae1
exists in high, intermediate, and low molecular weight complexes. The
intermediate molecular weight complexes containing Nup98 interacted most
efficiently with M protein. The low molecular weight form also interacted with M 
protein in cells that overexpress Rae1 or cells in which Nup98 expression was
silenced. Silencing Rae1 expression had little if any effect on nuclear
accumulation of host mRNA in VSV-infected cells, nor did it affect VSV's ability 
to inhibit host translation. Instead, silencing Rae1 expression reduced the
ability of VSV to inhibit host transcription. M protein interacted efficiently
with Rae1-Nup98 complexes associated with the chromatin fraction of host nuclei, 
consistent with an effect on host transcription. These results support the idea
that M protein-Rae1 complexes serve as platforms to promote the interaction of M 
protein with other factors involved in host transcription. They also support the 
idea that Rae1-Nup98 complexes play a previously under-appreciated role in
regulation of transcription.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002929 
PMCID: PMC3460625
PMID: 23028327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

