
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46037. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046037. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Human nucleoporins promote HIV-1 docking at the nuclear pore, nuclear import and 
integration.

Di Nunzio F(1), Danckaert A, Fricke T, Perez P, Fernandez J, Perret E, Roux P,
Shorte S, Charneau P, Diaz-Griffero F, Arhel NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology and Vaccinology Unit, CNRS URA 3015, Department of
Virology, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/34f46796-5d53-4a23-b3df-b599b0369eb9.

The nuclear pore complex (NPC) mediates nucleo-cytoplasmic transport of
macromolecules and is an obligatory point of passage and functional bottleneck in
the replication of some viruses. The Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) has
evolved the required mechanisms for active nuclear import of its genome through
the NPC. However the mechanisms by which the NPC allows or even assists HIV
translocation are still unknown. We investigated the involvement of four key
nucleoporins in HIV-1 docking, translocation, and integration: Nup358/RanBP2,
Nup214/CAN, Nup98 and Nup153. Although all induce defects in infectivity when
depleted, only Nup153 actually showed any evidence of participating in HIV-1
translocation through the nuclear pore. We show that Nup358/RanBP2 mediates
docking of HIV-1 cores on NPC cytoplasmic filaments by interacting with the cores
and that the C-terminus of Nup358/RanBP2 comprising a cyclophilin-homology domain
contributes to binding. We also show that Nup214/CAN and Nup98 play no role in
HIV-1 nuclear import per se: Nup214/CAN plays an indirect role in infectivity
read-outs through its effect on mRNA export, while the reduction of expression of
Nup98 shows a slight reduction in proviral integration. Our work shows the
involvement of nucleoporins in diverse and functionally separable steps of HIV
infection and nuclear import.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046037 
PMCID: PMC3457934
PMID: 23049930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

