
1. J Virol. 2013 Jan;87(1):243-56. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01693-12. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Interplay between polyadenylate-binding protein 1 and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus ORF57 in accumulation of polyadenylated nuclear RNA, a viral long
noncoding RNA.

Massimelli MJ(1), Majerciak V, Kruhlak M, Zheng ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Virus RNA Biology Laboratory, HIV and AIDS Malignancy Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Polyadenylate-binding protein cytoplasmic 1 (PABPC1) is a cytoplasmic-nuclear
shuttling protein important for protein translation initiation and both RNA
processing and stability. We report that PABPC1 forms a complex with the Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) ORF57 protein, which allows ORF57 to
interact with a 9-nucleotide (nt) core element of KSHV polyadenylated nuclear
(PAN) RNA, a viral long noncoding RNA (lncRNA), and increase PAN stability. The
N-terminal RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) of PABPC1 are necessary for the direct
interaction with ORF57. During KSHV lytic infection, the expression of viral
ORF57 leads to a substantial decrease in overall PABPC1 expression, along with a 
shift in the cellular distribution of the remaining PABPC1 to the nucleus.
Interestingly, PABPC1 and ORF57 have opposing functions in modulating PAN
steady-state accumulation. The suppressive effect of PABPC1 specific to PAN
expression is alleviated by small interfering RNA knockdown of PABPC1 or by
overexpression of ORF57. Conversely, ectopic PABPC1 reduces ORF57 steady-state
protein levels and induces aberrant polyadenylation of PAN and thereby indirectly
inhibits ORF57-mediated PAN accumulation. However, E1B-AP5 (heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein U-like 1), which interacts with a region outside the 9-nt core 
to stimulate PAN expression, does not interact or even colocalize with ORF57.
Unlike PABPC1, the nuclear distribution of E1B-AP5 remains unchanged by viral
lytic infection or overexpression of ORF57. Together, these data indicate that
PABPC1 is an important cellular target of viral ORF57 to directly upregulate PAN 
accumulation during viral lytic infection, and the ability of host PABPC1 to
disrupt ORF57 expression is a strategic host counterbalancing mechanism.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01693-12 
PMCID: PMC3536381
PMID: 23077296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

