
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(10):e1002949. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002949. Epub 2012
Oct 18.

Identification of FAM111A as an SV40 host range restriction and adenovirus helper
factor.

Fine DA(1), Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Padi M, Korkhin A, James RL, Adelmant G, Yoon R, 
Guo L, Berrios C, Zhang Y, Calderwood MA, Velmurgan S, Cheng J, Marto JA, Hill
DE, Cusick ME, Vidal M, Florens L, Washburn MP, Litovchick L, DeCaprio JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

The small genome of polyomaviruses encodes a limited number of proteins that are 
highly dependent on interactions with host cell proteins for efficient viral
replication. The SV40 large T antigen (LT) contains several discrete functional
domains including the LXCXE or RB-binding motif, the DNA binding and helicase
domains that contribute to the viral life cycle. In addition, the LT C-terminal
region contains the host range and adenovirus helper functions required for lytic
infection in certain restrictive cell types. To understand how LT affects the
host cell to facilitate viral replication, we expressed full-length or functional
domains of LT in cells, identified interacting host proteins and carried out
expression profiling. LT perturbed the expression of p53 target genes and subsets
of cell-cycle dependent genes regulated by the DREAM and the B-Myb-MuvB
complexes. Affinity purification of LT followed by mass spectrometry revealed a
specific interaction between the LT C-terminal region and FAM111A, a previously
uncharacterized protein. Depletion of FAM111A recapitulated the effects of
heterologous expression of the LT C-terminal region, including increased viral
gene expression and lytic infection of SV40 host range mutants and adenovirus
replication in restrictive cells. FAM111A functions as a host range restriction
factor that is specifically targeted by SV40 LT.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002949 
PMCID: PMC3475652
PMID: 23093934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

