
1. Blood. 2013 Jan 31;121(5):791-800. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-420414. Epub 2012
Oct 26.

PA28γ is a novel corepressor of HTLV-1 replication and controls viral latency.

Ko NL(1), Taylor JM, Bellon M, Bai XT, Shevtsov SP, Dundr M, Nicot C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for Viral Oncology,
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

The establishment of a latent reservoir by human tumor viruses is a vital step in
initiating cellular transformation and represents a major shortcoming to current 
therapeutic strategies and the ability to eradicate virus-infected cells. Human
T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) establishes a lifelong infection and is
linked to adult T-cell leukemia lymphoma (ATLL). Here, we demonstrate that HTLV-1
p30 recruits the cellular proteasome activator PA28γ onto the viral tax/rex mRNA 
to prevent its nuclear export and suppress virus replication. Interaction of p30 
with a PA28γ retaining fully functional proteasome activity is required for p30's
ability to repress HTLV-1. Consistently, HTLV-1 molecular clones replicate better
and produce more virus particles in PA28γ-deficient cells. These results define a
unique and novel role for the cellular factor PA28γ in the control of nuclear RNA
trafficking and HTLV-1–induced latency. Importantly, knockdown of PA28γ
expression in ATLL cells latently infected with HTLV-1 reactivates expression of 
viral tax/rex RNA and the Tax protein. Because Tax is the most immunogenic viral 
antigen and triggers strong CTL responses, our results suggest that
PA28γ-targeted therapy may reactivate virus expression from latently infected
cells and allow their eradication from the host.KEY POINTS: PA28γ acts as a
co-repressor of HTLV-1 p30 to suppress virus replication and is required for the 
maintenance of viral latency. HTLV-1 has evolved a unique function mediated by
its posttranscriptional repressor p30, which is not found in HTLV-2.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-420414 
PMCID: PMC3563364
PMID: 23104922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

