
1. J Virol. 2013 Jan;87(2):978-90. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01103-12. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

The replication defect of ICP0-null mutant herpes simplex virus 1 can be largely 
complemented by the combined activities of human cytomegalovirus proteins IE1 and
pp71.

Everett RD(1), Bell AJ, Lu Y, Orr A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research 8, Glasgow, Scotland.
roger.everett@glasgow.ac.uk

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) immediate-early protein ICP0 is required for
efficient lytic infection and productive reactivation from latency and induces
derepression of quiescent viral genomes. Despite being unrelated at the sequence 
level, ICP0 and human cytomegalovirus proteins IE1 and pp71 share some functional
similarities in their abilities to counteract antiviral restriction mediated by
components of cellular nuclear structures known as ND10. To investigate the
extent to which IE1 and pp71 might substitute for ICP0, cell lines were developed
that express either IE1 or pp71, or both together, in an inducible manner. We
found that pp71 dissociated the hDaxx-ATRX complex and inhibited accumulation of 
these proteins at sites juxtaposed to HSV-1 genomes but had no effect on the
promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) or Sp100. IE1 caused loss of the small
ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-conjugated forms of PML and Sp100 and inhibited
the recruitment of these proteins to HSV-1 genome foci but had little effect on
hDaxx or ATRX in these assays. Both IE1 and pp71 stimulated ICP0-null mutant
plaque formation, but neither to the extent achieved by ICP0. The combination of 
IE1 and pp71, however, inhibited recruitment of all ND10 proteins to viral genome
foci, stimulated ICP0-null mutant HSV-1 plaque formation to near wild-type
levels, and efficiently induced derepression of quiescent HSV-1 genomes. These
results suggest that ND10-related intrinsic resistance results from the additive 
effects of several ND10 components and that the effects of IE1 and pp71 on
subsets of these components combine to mirror the overall activities of ICP0.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01103-12 
PMCID: PMC3554063
PMID: 23135716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

