
1. BMC Struct Biol. 2012 Nov 13;12:28. doi: 10.1186/1472-6807-12-28.

Structural and molecular basis of interaction of HCV non-structural protein 5A
with human casein kinase 1α and PKR.

Sudha G(1), Yamunadevi S, Tyagi N, Das S, Srinivasan N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 560 012,
India.

BACKGROUND: Interaction of non-structural protein 5A (NS5A) of Hepatitis C virus 
(HCV) with human kinases namely, casein kinase 1α (ck1α) and protein kinase R
(PKR) have different functional implications such as regulation of viral
replication and evasion of interferon induced immune response respectively.
Understanding the structural and molecular basis of interactions of the viral
protein with two different human kinases can be useful in developing strategies
for treatment against HCV.
RESULTS: Serine 232 of NS5A is known to be phosphorylated by human ck1α. A
structural model of NS5A peptide containing phosphoacceptor residue Serine 232
bound to ck1α has been generated using the known 3-D structures of kinase-peptide
complexes. The substrate interacting residues in ck1α has been identified from
the model and these are found to be conserved well in the ck1 family. ck1α -
substrate peptide complex has also been used to understand the structural basis
of association between ck1α and its other viral stress induced substrate, tumour 
suppressor p53 transactivation domain which has a crystal structure
available.Interaction of NS5A with another human kinase PKR is primarily genotype
specific. NS5A from genotype 1b has been shown to interact and inhibit PKR
whereas NS5A from genotype 2a/3a are unable to bind and inhibit PKR efficiently. 
This is one of the main reasons for the varied response to interferon therapy in 
HCV patients across different genotypes. Using PKR crystal structure, sequence
alignment and evolutionary trace analysis some of the critical residues
responsible for the interaction of NS5A 1b with PKR have been identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The substrate interacting residues in ck1α have been identified
using the structural model of kinase - substrate peptide. The PKR interacting
NS5A 1b residues have also been predicted using PKR crystal structure, NS5A
sequence analysis along with known experimental results. Functional significance 
and nature of interaction of interferon sensitivity determining region and
variable region 3 of NS5A in different genotypes with PKR which was
experimentally shown are also supported by the findings of evolutionary trace
analysis. Designing inhibitors to prevent this interaction could enable the HCV
genotype 1 infected patients respond well to interferon therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6807-12-28 
PMCID: PMC3534215
PMID: 23148689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

