
1. J Virol. 2013 Apr;87(7):3729-40. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02477-12. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Comparative proteomic analysis of HIV-1 particles reveals a role for Ezrin and
EHD4 in the Nef-dependent increase of virus infectivity.

Brégnard C(1), Zamborlini A, Leduc M, Chafey P, Camoin L, Saïb A, Benichou S,
Danos O, Basmaciogullari S.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Paris, France.

Nef is a human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) auxiliary protein that plays
an important role in virus replication and the onset of acquired
immunodeficiency. Although known functions of Nef might explain its contribution 
to HIV-1-associated pathogenesis, how Nef increases virus infectivity is still an
open question. In vitro, Nef-deleted viruses have a defect that prevents
efficient completion of early steps of replication. We have previously shown that
this restriction is not due to the absence of Nef in viral particles. Rather, a
loss of function in virus-producing cells accounts for the lower infectivity of
nef-deleted viruses compared to wild-type (WT) viruses. Here we used DiGE and
iTRAQ to identify differences between the proteomes of WT and nef-deleted
viruses. We observe that glucosidase II is enriched in WT virions, whereas Ezrin,
ALG-2, CD81, and EHD4 are enriched in nef-deleted virions. Functional analysis
shows that glucosidase II, ALG-2, and CD81 have no or only Nef-independent effect
on infectivity. In contrast, Ezrin and EHD4 are involved in the ability of Nef to
increase virus infectivity (referred to thereafter as Nef potency). Indeed,
simultaneous Ezrin and EHD4 depletion in SupT1 and 293T virus-producing cells
result in an ∼30 and ∼70% decrease of Nef potency, respectively. Finally, while
Ezrin behaves as an inhibitory factor counteracted by Nef, EHD4 should be
considered as a cofactors required by Nef to increase virus infectivity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02477-12 
PMCID: PMC3624205
PMID: 23325686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

