
1. J Virol. 2013 Apr;87(7):4017-32. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03396-12. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

SMC1-mediated intra-S-phase arrest facilitates bocavirus DNA replication.

Luo Y(1), Deng X, Cheng F, Li Y, Qiu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.

Activation of a host DNA damage response (DDR) is essential for DNA replication
of minute virus of canines (MVC), a member of the genus Bocavirus of the
Parvoviridae family; however, the mechanism by which DDR contributes to viral DNA
replication is unknown. In the current study, we demonstrate that MVC infection
triggers the intra-S-phase arrest to slow down host cellular DNA replication and 
to recruit cellular DNA replication factors for viral DNA replication. The
intra-S-phase arrest is regulated by ATM (ataxia telangiectasia-mutated kinase)
signaling in a p53-independent manner. Moreover, we demonstrate that SMC1
(structural maintenance of chromosomes 1) is the key regulator of the
intra-S-phase arrest induced during infection. Either knockdown of SMC1 or
complementation with a dominant negative SMC1 mutant blocks both the
intra-S-phase arrest and viral DNA replication. Finally, we show that the
intra-S-phase arrest induced during MVC infection was caused neither by damaged
host cellular DNA nor by viral proteins but by replicating viral genomes
physically associated with the DNA damage sensor, the Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1 (MRN)
complex. In conclusion, the feedback loop between MVC DNA replication and the
intra-S-phase arrest is mediated by ATM-SMC1 signaling and plays a critical role 
in MVC DNA replication. Thus, our findings unravel the mechanism underlying DDR
signaling-facilitated MVC DNA replication and demonstrate a novel strategy of DNA
virus-host interaction.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03396-12 
PMCID: PMC3624210
PMID: 23365434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

