
1. J Virol. 2013 Apr;87(8):4523-33. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02548-12. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

TRIM22 inhibits influenza A virus infection by targeting the viral nucleoprotein 
for degradation.

Di Pietro A(1), Kajaste-Rudnitski A, Oteiza A, Nicora L, Towers GJ, Mechti N,
Vicenzi E.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Pathogens and Biosafety Unit, Division of Immunology, Transplantation
and Infectious Diseases, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Tripartite motif (TRIM) protein superfamily members are emerging as important
effectors of the innate immune response against viral infections. In particular, 
TRIM22 was reported to exert antiviral activity against RNA viruses, such as
hepatitis B virus (HBV), encephalomyocarditis virus (ECMV), and human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). We demonstrate here, for the first time,
that TRIM22 is upregulated by influenza A virus (IAV) infection at both mRNA and 
protein levels in human alveolar epithelial A549 cells. Conversely, TRIM22
potently restricted IAV replication, in that prevention of TRIM22 expression by
means of short hairpin RNA led to a 10-fold enhancement of IAV replication in
these cells. Depletion of TRIM22 also reduced the anti-IAV activity of alpha
interferon (IFN-Î±), suggesting that TRIM22 is an important IFN-stimulated gene
that is required for maximal suppression of IAV by type I IFN. Furthermore, the
IAV infectious titer decreased up to 100-fold in MDCK cells expressing exogenous 
human TRIM22. Restriction of IAV replication was accounted for by the interaction
between TRIM22 and the viral nucleoprotein (NP), resulting in its
polyubiquitination and degradation in a proteasome-dependent manner. Thus, TRIM22
represents a novel restriction factor upregulated upon IAV infection that
curtails its replicative capacity in epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02548-12 
PMCID: PMC3624352
PMID: 23408607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

