
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55989. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055989. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

Activation of WIP1 phosphatase by HTLV-1 Tax mitigates the cellular response to
DNA damage.

Dayaram T(1), Lemoine FJ, Donehower LA, Marriott SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Genomic instability stemming from dysregulation of cell cycle checkpoints and DNA
damage response (DDR) is a common feature of many cancers. The cancer adult T
cell leukemia (ATL) can occur in individuals infected with human T cell leukemia 
virus type 1 (HTLV-1), and ATL cells contain extensive chromosomal abnormalities,
suggesting that they have defects in the recognition or repair of DNA damage.
Since Tax is the transforming protein encoded by HTLV-1, we asked whether Tax can
affect cell cycle checkpoints and the DDR. Using a combination of flow cytometry 
and DNA repair assays we showed that Tax-expressing cells exit G(1) phase and
initiate DNA replication prematurely following damage. Reduced phosphorylation of
H2AX (γH2AX) and RPA2, phosphoproteins that are essential to properly initiate
the DDR, was also observed in Tax-expressing cells. To determine the cause of
decreased DDR protein phosphorylation in Tax-expressing cells, we examined the
cellular phosphatase, WIP1, which is known to dephosphorylate γH2AX. We found
that Tax can interact with Wip1 in vivo and in vitro, and that Tax-expressing
cells display elevated levels of Wip1 mRNA. In vitro phosphatase assays showed
that Tax can enhance Wip1 activity on a γH2AX peptide target by 2-fold. Thus,
loss of γH2AX in vivo could be due, in part, to increased expression and activity
of WIP1 in the presence of Tax. siRNA knockdown of WIP1 in Tax-expressing cells
rescued γH2AX in response to damage, confirming the role of WIP1 in the DDR.
These studies demonstrate that Tax can disengage the G(1)/S checkpoint by
enhancing WIP1 activity, resulting in reduced DDR. Premature G(1) exit of
Tax-expressing cells in the presence of DNA lesions creates an environment that
tolerates incorporation of random mutations into the host genome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055989 
PMCID: PMC3566092
PMID: 23405243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

