
1. J Microbiol. 2013 Apr;51(2):241-6. doi: 10.1007/s12275-013-2514-1. Epub 2013 Apr 
27.

Allelic MHC class I chain related B (MICB) molecules affect the binding to the
human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) unique long 16 (UL16) protein: implications for
immune surveillance.

Klumkrathok K(1), Jumnainsong A, Leelayuwat C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Technology PhD Program, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol
University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

Unique long 16 (UL16) is a viral glycoprotein produced in a host cell infected
with human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). It down regulates surface expression of MICB, 
one of the NKG2D ligands, by forming stable intracellular complexes and retained 
in the endoplasmic reticulum. Down expression of MICB renders cells less
susceptible to NK cell lysis via the NKG2D receptor. Diverse UL16 sequences were 
identified from different strains of HCMV. MICB is known to be polymorphic. It is
not known whether these polymorphisms affect the interactions between these
molecules leading to alteration of the immune surveillance of HCMV. The soluble
Fc fusion variant UL16 proteins from four laboratory and clinical isolates
(AD169, Toledo, PH, and TR) were produced. Four allelic MICB alleles (008, 003,
004, and 00502) were cloned and stable cell lines expressing these MICB alleles
were produced. The binding activities of variant UL16 to allelic MICB proteins
were determined by flow cytometry. The variants of UL16 proteins did not affect
the binding activities to allelic MICB proteins. However, diverse MICB alleles
differentially bound UL16. We found that MICB*008 which contains methionine and
asparagine at the amino acid positions 98 and 113, respectively, in the alpha 2
domain showed decreased binding activities to UL16 when compared to MICB*003,
004, and MICB*00502 containing isoleucine and aspartic acid, respectively. This
finding may imply that MICB*008 is a protective allele and involved in the immune
surveillance of HCMV infected patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s12275-013-2514-1 
PMID: 23625227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

