
1. J Virol. 2013 Jul;87(13):7502-15. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00519-13. Epub 2013 May 1.

Annexin A2 and S100A10 regulate human papillomavirus type 16 entry and
intracellular trafficking in human keratinocytes.

Dziduszko A(1), Ozbun MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico
School of Medicine, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) cause benign and malignant tumors of the mucosal
and cutaneous epithelium. The initial events regulating HPV infection impact the 
establishment of viral persistence, which is requisite for malignant progression 
of HPV-infected lesions. However, the precise mechanisms involved in HPV entry
into host cells, including the cellular factors regulating virus uptake, are not 
clearly defined. We show that HPV16 exposure to human keratinocytes initiates
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-dependent Src protein kinase activation
that results in phosphorylation and extracellular translocation of annexin A2
(AnxA2). HPV16 particles interact with AnxA2 in association with S100A10 as a
heterotetramer at the cell surface in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner, and the
interaction appears to involve heparan-sulfonated proteoglycans. We show multiple
lines of evidence that this interaction promotes virus uptake into host cells. An
antibody to AnxA2 prevents HPV16 internalization, whereas an antibody to S100A10 
blocks infection at a late endosomal/lysosomal site. These results suggest that
AnxA2 and S100A10 have separate roles during HPV16 binding, entry, and
trafficking. Our data additionally imply that AnxA2 and S100A10 may be involved
in regulating the intracellular trafficking of virus particles prior to nuclear
delivery of the viral genome.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00519-13 
PMCID: PMC3700289
PMID: 23637395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

