
1. Open Virol J. 2013 Mar 22;7:37-40. doi: 10.2174/1874357901307010037. Print 2013.

Hepatitis C Virus Envelope Protein E1 Binds PERK and Represses the Unfolded
Protein Response.

Egan PA(1), Sobkowiak M, Chan SW.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester, Michael Smith
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

Unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular adaptive response which functions
to reduce stress caused by misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). 
We and others have previously shown that infection with hepatitis C virus (HCV)
or expression of the viral proteins can trigger the UPR. HCV is a single-stranded
positive-sense RNA virus causing chronic diseases in humans. Its genome encodes
two envelope proteins E1 and E2 that mature in the ER to form non-covalently
bound native complex and disulphide-bonded aggregates. Apart from the ER
targeting proteins, cytosolic forms have been documented. We have previously
shown that the ER-targeting E1 and E2 are capable of eliciting the UPR whereas
others have shown that the cytosolic-targeting E2 can bind to the ER stress
kinase PERK to dampen the UPR. In this report, we further show that the other
envelope protein E1, in its cytosolic form, can also bind PERK and dampen the
UPR. Using GST-pulldown assay, we show that E1 binds to the cytoplasmic domain of
PERK, suggesting interaction of E1 and PERK takes place in the cytoplasm. Using
reporter gene assay and Western blotting, we show that cytosolic E1 can repress
UPR-induced BiP and CHOP promoter activity and reduce UPR-induced CHOP expression
level. Altogether these results suggest opposing functions of ER- and cytosolic
forms of HCV envelope proteins depending on their subcellular localization.

DOI: 10.2174/1874357901307010037 
PMCID: PMC3648774
PMID: 23667408 

