
1. J Virol. 2013 Jul;87(14):8053-63. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00546-13. Epub 2013 May 15.

The B-cell-specific transcription factor and master regulator Pax5 promotes
Epstein-Barr virus latency by negatively regulating the viral immediate early
protein BZLF1.

Raver RM(1), Panfil AR, Hagemeier SR, Kenney SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology (McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research), University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

The latent-to-lytic switch of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is mediated by the
immediate early protein BZLF1 (Z). However, the cellular factors regulating this 
process remain incompletely characterized. In this report, we show that the
B-cell-specific transcription factor Pax5 helps to promote viral latency in B
cells by blocking Z function. Although Z was previously shown to directly
interact with Pax5 and inhibit its activity, the effect of Pax5 on Z function has
not been investigated. Here, we demonstrate that Pax5 inhibits Z-mediated lytic
viral gene expression and the release of infectious viral particles in latently
infected epithelial cell lines. Conversely, we found that shRNA-mediated
knockdown of endogenous Pax5 in a Burkitt lymphoma B-cell line leads to viral
reactivation. Furthermore, we show that Pax5 reduces Z activation of early lytic 
viral promoters in reporter gene assays and inhibits Z binding to lytic viral
promoters in vivo. We confirm that Pax5 and Z directly interact and show that
this interaction requires the carboxy-terminal DNA-binding/dimerization domain of
Z and the amino-terminal DNA-binding domain of Pax5. A Pax5 DNA-binding mutant
(V26G/P80R) that interacts with Z retains the ability to inhibit Z function,
whereas a Pax5 mutant (Î”106-110) that is deficient for interaction with Z does
not inhibit Z-mediated lytic viral reactivation. Since the B-cell-specific
transcription factor Oct-2 also directly interacts with Z and inhibits its
function, these results suggest that EBV uses multiple redundant mechanisms to
establish and maintain viral latency in B cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00546-13 
PMCID: PMC3700198
PMID: 23678172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

