
1. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e66156. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066156. Print 2013.

Identification of a human protein-derived HIV-1 fusion inhibitor targeting the
gp41 fusion core structure.

Chao L(1), Lu L, Yang H, Zhu Y, Li Y, Wang Q, Yu X, Jiang S, Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University,
Beijing Key Laboratory for Protein Therapeutics, Protein Science Laboratory of
the Ministry of Education, Beijing, P. R. China.

The HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein (Env) gp41 plays a crucial role in the viral
fusion process. The peptides derived from the C-terminal heptad repeat (CHR) of
gp41 are potent HIV fusion inhibitors. However, the activity of these anti-HIV-1 
peptides in vivo may be attenuated by their induction of anti-gp41 antibodies.
Thus, it is essential to identify antiviral peptides or proteins with low, or no,
immunogenicity to humans. Here, we found that the C-terminal fragment (aa
462-521) of the human POB1 (the partner of RalBP1), designated C60, is an HIV-1
fusion inhibitor. It bound to N36, the peptide derived from the N-terminal heptad
repeat (NHR) of gp41, and to the six-helix bundle (6-HB) formed by N36 and C34, a
CHR-peptide, but it did not bind to C34. Unlike the CHR-peptides, C60 did not
block gp41 6-HB formation. Rather, results suggest that C60 inhibits HIV-1 fusion
by binding to the 6-HB, in particular, the residues in the gp41 NHR domain that
are exposed on the surface of 6-HB. Since 6-HB plays a crucial role in the late
stage of fusion between the viral envelope and endosomal membrane during the
endocytic process of HIV-1, C60 may serve as a host restriction factor to
suppress HIV-1 entry into CD4+ T lymphocytes. Taken together, it can be concluded
from these results that C60 can be used as a lead for the development of
anti-HIV-1 therapeutics or microbicides for the treatment and prevention of HIV-1
infection, as well as a molecular probe to study the fusogenic mechanism of
HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066156 
PMCID: PMC3669275
PMID: 23741527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

