
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(7):e1003465. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003465. Epub 2013 Jul
4.

Myxoma virus protein M029 is a dual function immunomodulator that inhibits PKR
and also conscripts RHA/DHX9 to promote expanded host tropism and viral
replication.

Rahman MM(1), Liu J, Chan WM, Rothenburg S, McFadden G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

Myxoma virus (MYXV)-encoded protein M029 is a member of the poxvirus E3 family of
dsRNA-binding proteins that antagonize the cellular interferon signaling
pathways. In order to investigate additional functions of M029, we have
constructed a series of targeted M029-minus (vMyx-M029KO and vMyx-M029ID) and
V5-tagged M029 MYXV. We found that M029 plays a pivotal role in determining the
cellular tropism of MYXV in all mammalian cells tested. The M029-minus viruses
were able to replicate only in engineered cell lines that stably express a
complementing protein, such as vaccinia E3, but underwent abortive or abated
infection in all other tested mammalian cell lines. The M029-minus viruses were
dramatically attenuated in susceptible host European rabbits and caused no
observable signs of myxomatosis. Using V5-tagged M029 virus, we observed that
M029 expressed as an early viral protein is localized in both the nuclear and
cytosolic compartments in virus-infected cells, and is also incorporated into
virions. Using proteomic approaches, we have identified Protein Kinase R (PKR)
and RNA helicase A (RHA)/DHX9 as two cellular binding partners of M029 protein.
In virus-infected cells, M029 interacts with PKR in a dsRNA-dependent manner,
while binding with DHX9 was not dependent on dsRNA. Significantly, PKR knockdown 
in human cells rescued the replication defect of the M029-knockout viruses.
Unexpectedly, this rescue of M029-minus virus replication by PKR depletion could 
then be reversed by RHA/DHX9 knockdown in human monocytic THP1 cells. This
indicates that M029 not only inhibits generic PKR anti-viral pathways, but also
binds and conscripts RHA/DHX9 as a pro-viral effector to promote virus
replication in THP1 cells. Thus, M029 is a critical host range and virulence
factor for MYXV that is required for replication in all mammalian cells by
antagonizing PKR-mediated anti-viral functions, and also conscripts pro-viral
RHA/DHX9 to promote viral replication specifically in myeloid cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003465 
PMCID: PMC3701710
PMID: 23853588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

