
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24753-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.491985. Epub
2013 Jul 15.

Hepatitis C virus NS5A inhibits mixed lineage kinase 3 to block apoptosis.

Amako Y(1), Igloi Z, Mankouri J, Kazlauskas A, Saksela K, Dallas M, Peers C,
Harris M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection results in the activation of numerous stress
responses including oxidative stress, with the potential to induce an apoptotic
state. Previously we have shown that HCV attenuates the stress-induced,
p38MAPK-mediated up-regulation of the K(+) channel Kv2.1, to maintain the
survival of infected cells in the face of cellular stress. We demonstrated that
this effect was mediated by HCV non-structural 5A (NS5A) protein, which impaired 
p38MAPK activity through a polyproline motif-dependent interaction, resulting in 
reduction of phosphorylation activation of Kv2.1. In this study, we investigated 
the host cell proteins targeted by NS5A to mediate Kv2.1 inhibition. We screened 
a phage-display library expressing the entire complement of human SH3 domains for
novel NS5A-host cell interactions. This analysis identified mixed lineage kinase 
3 (MLK3) as a putative NS5A interacting partner. MLK3 is a serine/threonine
protein kinase that is a member of the MAPK kinase kinase (MAP3K) family and
activates p38MAPK. An NS5A-MLK3 interaction was confirmed by
co-immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis. We further demonstrate a novel 
role of MLK3 in the modulation of Kv2.1 activity, whereby MLK3 overexpression
leads to the up-regulation of channel activity. Accordingly, coexpression of NS5A
suppressed this stimulation. Additionally we demonstrate that overexpression of
MLK3 induced apoptosis, which was also counteracted by NS5A. We conclude that
NS5A targets MLK3 with multiple downstream consequences for both apoptosis and
K(+) homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.491985 
PMCID: PMC3750171
PMID: 23857585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

