
1. J Virol. 2013 Oct;87(20):11031-46. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00304-13. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

The Golgi protein ACBD3, an interactor for poliovirus protein 3A, modulates
poliovirus replication.

Téoulé F(1), Brisac C, Pelletier I, Vidalain PO, Jégouic S, Mirabelli C, Bessaud 
M, Combelas N, Autret A, Tangy F, Delpeyroux F, Blondel B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Biologie des Virus Entériques, Paris, France.

We have shown that the circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses responsible for
poliomyelitis outbreaks in Madagascar have recombinant genomes composed of
sequences encoding capsid proteins derived from poliovaccine Sabin, mostly type 2
(PVS2), and sequences encoding nonstructural proteins derived from other human
enteroviruses. Interestingly, almost all of these recombinant genomes encode a
nonstructural 3A protein related to that of field coxsackievirus A17 (CV-A17)
strains. Here, we investigated the repercussions of this exchange, by assessing
the role of the 3A proteins of PVS2 and CV-A17 and their putative cellular
partners in viral replication. We found that the Golgi protein acyl-coenzyme A
binding domain-containing 3 (ACBD3), recently identified as an interactor for the
3A proteins of several picornaviruses, interacts with the 3A proteins of PVS2 and
CV-A17 at viral RNA replication sites, in human neuroblastoma cells infected with
either PVS2 or a PVS2 recombinant encoding a 3A protein from CV-A17
[PVS2-3A(CV-A17)]. The small interfering RNA-mediated downregulation of ACBD3
significantly increased the growth of both viruses, suggesting that ACBD3 slowed 
viral replication. This was confirmed with replicons. Furthermore,
PVS2-3A(CV-A17) was more resistant to the replication-inhibiting effect of ACBD3 
than the PVS2 strain, and the amino acid in position 12 of 3A was involved in
modulating the sensitivity of viral replication to ACBD3. Overall, our results
indicate that exchanges of nonstructural proteins can modify the relationships
between enterovirus recombinants and cellular interactors and may thus be one of 
the factors favoring their emergence.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00304-13 
PMCID: PMC3807280
PMID: 23926333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

