
1. J Virol. 2013 Nov;87(21):11704-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01474-13. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

A host YB-1 ribonucleoprotein complex is hijacked by hepatitis C virus for the
control of NS3-dependent particle production.

Chatel-Chaix L(1), Germain MA, Motorina A, Bonneil É, Thibault P, Baril M,
Lamarre D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et en Cancérologie.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) orchestrates the different stages of its life cycle in
time and space through the sequential participation of HCV proteins and cellular 
machineries; hence, these represent tractable molecular host targets for HCV
elimination by combination therapies. We recently identified multifunctional
Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1 or YBX1) as an interacting partner of NS3/4A
protein and HCV genomic RNA that negatively regulates the equilibrium between
viral translation/replication and particle production. To identify novel host
factors that regulate the production of infectious particles, we elucidated the
YB-1 interactome in human hepatoma cells by a quantitative mass spectrometry
approach. We identified 71 YB-1-associated proteins that included previously
reported HCV regulators DDX3, heterogeneous nuclear RNP A1, and ILF2. Of the
potential YB-1 interactors, 26 proteins significantly modulated HCV replication
in a gene-silencing screening. Following extensive interaction and functional
validation, we identified three YB-1 partners, C1QBP, LARP-1, and IGF2BP2, that
redistribute to the surface of core-containing lipid droplets in HCV
JFH-1-expressing cells, similarly to YB-1 and DDX6. Importantly, knockdown of
these proteins stimulated the release and/or egress of HCV particles without
affecting virus assembly, suggesting a functional YB-1 protein complex that
negatively regulates virus production. Furthermore, a JFH-1 strain with the NS3
Q221L mutation, which promotes virus production, was less sensitive to this
negative regulation, suggesting that this HCV-specific YB-1 protein complex
modulates an NS3-dependent step in virus production. Overall, our data support a 
model in which HCV hijacks host cell machinery containing numerous RNA-binding
proteins to control the equilibrium between viral RNA replication and
NS3-dependent late steps in particle production.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01474-13 
PMCID: PMC3807372
PMID: 23986595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

