
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 5;110(45):18220-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1307336110. Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Tenascin-C is an innate broad-spectrum, HIV-1-neutralizing protein in breast
milk.

Fouda GG(1), Jaeger FH, Amos JD, Ho C, Kunz EL, Anasti K, Stamper LW, Liebl BE,
Barbas KH, Ohashi T, Moseley MA, Liao HX, Erickson HP, Alam SM, Permar SR.

Author information: 
(1)Human Vaccine Institute, Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Genome
Sciences and Policy, and Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC 27710.

Achieving an AIDS-free generation will require elimination of postnatal
transmission of HIV-1 while maintaining the nutritional and immunologic benefits 
of breastfeeding for infants in developing regions. Maternal/infant
antiretroviral prophylaxis can reduce postnatal HIV-1 transmission, yet
toxicities and the development of drug-resistant viral strains may limit the
effectiveness of this strategy. Interestingly, in the absence of antiretroviral
prophylaxis, greater than 90% of infants exposed to HIV-1 via breastfeeding
remain uninfected, despite daily mucosal exposure to the virus for up to 2 y.
Moreover, milk of uninfected women inherently neutralizes HIV-1 and prevents
virus transmission in animal models, yet the factor(s) responsible for this
anti-HIV activity is not well-defined. In this report, we identify a primary
HIV-1-neutralizing protein in breast milk, Tenascin-C (TNC). TNC is an
extracellular matrix protein important in fetal development and wound healing,
yet its antimicrobial properties have not previously been established. Purified
TNC captured and neutralized multiclade chronic and transmitted/founder HIV-1
variants, and depletion of TNC abolished the HIV-1-neutralizing activity of milk.
TNC bound the HIV-1 Envelope protein at a site that is induced upon engagement of
its primary receptor, CD4, and is blocked by V3 loop- (19B and F39F) and
chemokine coreceptor binding site-directed (17B) monoclonal antibodies. Our
results demonstrate the ability of an innate mucosal host protein found in milk
to neutralize HIV-1 via binding to the chemokine coreceptor site, potentially
explaining why the majority of HIV-1-exposed breastfed infants are protected
against mucosal HIV-1 transmission.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1307336110 
PMCID: PMC3831436
PMID: 24145401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

