
1. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 31;33(31):4039-49. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.426. Epub 2013 Oct
21.

A functional interaction of E7 with B-Myb-MuvB complex promotes acute cooperative
transcriptional activation of both S- and M-phase genes. (129 c).

Pang CL(1), Toh SY(2), He P(2), Teissier S(2), Ben Khalifa Y(3), Xue Y(2),
Thierry F(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Medical Biology, A*STAR, Immunos #06-05, 8A Biomedical Grove, 
Singapore [2] Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Institute of Medical Biology, A*STAR, Immunos #06-05, 8A Biomedical Grove,
Singapore.
(3)Lyssavirus dynamics and host adaptation, Pasteur Institute, 25 rue Dr Roux,
Paris, France.

Comment in
    Oncogene. 2014 Jul 31;33(31):4036-8.

High-risk human papillomaviruses are causative agents of cervical cancer. Viral
protein E7 is required to establish and maintain the pro-oncogenic phenotype in
infected cells, but the molecular mechanisms by which E7 promotes carcinogenesis 
are only partially understood. Our transcriptome analyses in primary human
fibroblasts transduced with the viral protein revealed that E7 activates a group 
of mitotic genes via the activator B-Myb-MuvB complex. We show that E7 interacts 
with the B-Myb, FoxM1 and LIN9 components of this activator complex, leading to
cooperative transcriptional activation of mitotic genes in primary cells and E7
recruitment to the corresponding promoters. E7 interaction with LIN9 and FoxM1
depended on the LXCXE motif, which is also required for pocket protein
interaction and degradation. Using E7 mutants for the degradation of pocket
proteins but intact for the LXCXE motif, we demonstrate that E7 functional
interaction with the B-Myb-MuvB complex and pocket protein degradation are two
discrete functions of the viral protein that cooperate to promote acute
transcriptional activation of mitotic genes. Transcriptional level of E7 in
patient's cervical lesions at different stages of progression was shown to
correlate with those of B-Myb and FoxM1 as well as other mitotic gene
transcripts, thereby linking E7 with cellular proliferation and progression in
cervical cancer in vivo. E7 thus can directly activate the transcriptional levels
of cell cycle genes independently of pocket protein stability.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2013.426 
PMID: 24141769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

