
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 10;110(50):E4884-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1312420110. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

A unique secreted adenovirus E3 protein binds to the leukocyte common antigen
CD45 and modulates leukocyte functions.

Windheim M(1), Southcombe JH, Kremmer E, Chaplin L, Urlaub D, Falk CS, Claus M,
Mihm J, Braithwaite M, Dennehy K, Renz H, Sester M, Watzl C, Burgert HG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United
Kingdom.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 10;110(50):19976-7.

The E3 transcription unit of human adenoviruses (Ads) encodes immunomodulatory
proteins. Interestingly, the size and composition of the E3 region differs
considerably among Ad species, suggesting that distinct sets of immunomodulatory 
E3 proteins may influence their interaction with the human host and the disease
pattern. However, to date, only common immune evasion functions of species C E3
proteins have been described. Here we report on the immunomodulatory activity of 
a species D-specific E3 protein, E3/49K. Unlike all other E3 proteins that act on
infected cells, E3/49K seems to target uninfected cells. Initially synthesized as
an 80- to 100-kDa type I transmembrane protein, E3/49K is subsequently cleaved,
with the large ectodomain (sec49K) secreted. We found that purified sec49K
exhibits specific binding to lymphoid cell lines and all primary leukocytes, but 
not to fibroblasts or epithelial cells. Consistent with this binding profile and 
the molecular mass, the sec49K receptor was identified as the cell surface
protein tyrosine phosphatase CD45. Antibody-blocking studies suggested that
sec49K binds to the membrane proximal domains present in all CD45 isoforms.
Functional studies showed that sec49K can suppress the activation and
cytotoxicity of natural killer cells as well as the activation, signaling, and
cytokine production of T cells. Thus, we have discovered an adenovirus protein
that is actively secreted and describe immunomodulatory activities of an E3
protein uniquely expressed by a single Ad species.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1312420110 
PMCID: PMC3864294
PMID: 24218549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

