
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 14;8(11):e80297. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080297.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of TRAPPC8 as a host factor required for human papillomavirus cell
entry.

Ishii Y(1), Nakahara T, Kataoka M, Kusumoto-Matsuo R, Mori S, Takeuchi T,
Kukimoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Pathogen Genomics Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo,
Japan.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a non-enveloped virus composed of a circular DNA
genome and two capsid proteins, L1 and L2. Multiple interactions between its
capsid proteins and host cellular proteins are required for infectious HPV entry,
including cell attachment and internalization, intracellular trafficking and
viral genome transfer into the nucleus. Using two variants of HPV type 51, the Ma
and Nu strains, we have previously reported that MaL2 is required for efficient
pseudovirus (PsV) transduction. However, the cellular factors that confer this L2
dependency have not yet been identified. Here we report that the transport
protein particle complex subunit 8 (TRAPPC8) specifically interacts with MaL2.
TRAPPC8 knockdown in HeLa cells yielded reduced levels of reporter gene
expression when inoculated with HPV51Ma, HPV16, and HPV31 PsVs. TRAPPC8 knockdown
in HaCaT cells also showed reduced susceptibility to infection with authentic
HPV31 virions, indicating that TRAPPC8 plays a crucial role in native HPV
infection. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that the central region of
TRAPPC8 was exposed on the cell surface and colocalized with inoculated PsVs. The
entry of Ma, Nu, and L2-lacking PsVs into cells was equally impaired in TRAPPC8
knockdown HeLa cells, suggesting that TRAPPC8-dependent endocytosis plays an
important role in HPV entry that is independent of L2 interaction. Finally,
expression of GFP-fused L2 that can also interact with TRAPPC8 induced dispersal 
of the Golgi stack structure in HeLa cells, a phenotype also observed by TRAPPC8 
knockdown. These results suggest that during viral intracellular trafficking,
binding of L2 to TRAPPC8 inhibits its function resulting in Golgi
destabilization, a process that may assist HPV genome escape from the trans-Golgi
network.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080297 
PMCID: PMC3828182
PMID: 24244674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

