
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(11):e1003775. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003775. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

SPOC1-mediated antiviral host cell response is antagonized early in human
adenovirus type 5 infection.

Schreiner S(1), Kinkley S, BÃ¼rck C, Mund A, Wimmer P, Schubert T, Groitl P, Will 
H, Dobner T.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology,
Hamburg, Germany.

Little is known about immediate phases after viral infection and how an incoming 
viral genome complex counteracts host cell defenses, before the start of viral
gene expression. Adenovirus (Ad) serves as an ideal model, since entry and onset 
of gene expression are rapid and highly efficient, and mechanisms used 24-48
hours post infection to counteract host antiviral and DNA repair factors (e.g.
p53, Mre11, Daxx) are well studied. Here, we identify an even earlier host cell
target for Ad, the chromatin-associated factor and epigenetic reader, SPOC1,
recently found recruited to double strand breaks, and playing a role in DNA
damage response. SPOC1 co-localized with viral replication centers in the host
cell nucleus, interacted with Ad DNA, and repressed viral gene expression at the 
transcriptional level. We discovered that this SPOC1-mediated restriction imposed
upon Ad growth is relieved by its functional association with the Ad major core
protein pVII that enters with the viral genome, followed by
E1B-55K/E4orf6-dependent proteasomal degradation of SPOC1. Mimicking removal of
SPOC1 in the cell, knock down of this cellular restriction factor using RNAi
techniques resulted in significantly increased Ad replication, including enhanced
viral gene expression. However, depletion of SPOC1 also reduced the efficiency of
E1B-55K transcriptional repression of cellular promoters, with possible
implications for viral transformation. Intriguingly, not exclusive to Ad
infection, other human pathogenic viruses (HSV-1, HSV-2, HIV-1, and HCV) also
depleted SPOC1 in infected cells. Our findings provide a general model for how
pathogenic human viruses antagonize intrinsic SPOC1-mediated antiviral responses 
in their host cells. A better understanding of viral entry and early restrictive 
functions in host cells should provide new perspectives for developing antiviral 
agents and therapies. Conversely, for Ad vectors used in gene therapy,
counteracting mechanisms eradicating incoming viral DNA would increase Ad vector 
efficacy and safety for the patient.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003775 
PMCID: PMC3836738
PMID: 24278021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

