
1. J Virol. 2014 Apr;88(7):3653-63. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03263-13. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

The human papillomavirus E7 proteins associate with p190RhoGAP and alter its
function.

Todorovic B(1), Nichols AC, Chitilian JM, Myers MP, Shepherd TG, Parsons SJ,
Barrett JW, Banks L, Mymryk JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.

Using mass spectrometry, we identified p190RhoGAP (p190) as a binding partner of 
human papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) E7. p190 belongs to the GTPase activating protein
(GAP) family and is one of the primary GAPs for RhoA. GAPs stimulate the
intrinsic GTPase activity of the Rho proteins, leading to Rho inactivation and
influencing numerous biological processes. RhoA is one of the best-characterized 
Rho proteins and is specifically involved in formation of focal adhesions and
stress fibers, thereby regulating cell migration and cell spreading. Since this
is the first report that E7 associates with p190, we carried out detailed
interaction studies. We show that E7 proteins from other HPV types also bind
p190. Furthermore, we found that conserved region 3 (CR3) of E7 and the middle
domain of p190 are important for this interaction. More specifically, we
identified two residues in CR3 of E7 that are necessary for p190 binding and used
mutants of E7 with mutations of these residues to determine the biological
consequences of the E7-p190 interaction. Our data suggest that the interaction of
E7 with p190 dysregulates this GAP and alters the actin cytoskeleton. We also
found that this interaction negatively regulates cell spreading on a fibronectin 
substrate and therefore likely contributes to important aspects of the HPV life
cycle or HPV-induced tumorigenesis.IMPORTANCE: This study identifies p190RhoGAP
as a novel cellular binding partner for the human papillomavirus (HPV) E7
protein. Our study shows that a large number of different HPV E7 proteins bind
p190RhoGAP, and it identifies regions in both E7 and p190RhoGAP which are
important for the interaction to occur. This study also highlights the likelihood
that the E7-p190RhoGAP interaction may have important biological consequences
related to actin organization in the infected cell. These changes could be an
important contributor to the viral life cycle and during progression to cancer in
HPV-infected cells. Importantly, this work also emphasizes the need for further
study in a field which has largely been unexplored as it relates to the HPV life 
cycle and HPV-induced transformation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03263-13 
PMCID: PMC3993551
PMID: 24403595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

