
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 25;111(8):3152-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1314718111. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Tyrosine sulfation in the second variable loop (V2) of HIV-1 gp120 stabilizes
V2-V3 interaction and modulates neutralization sensitivity.

Cimbro R(1), Gallant TR, Dolan MA, Guzzo C, Zhang P, Lin Y, Miao H, Van Ryk D,
Arthos J, Gorshkova I, Brown PH, Hurt DE, Lusso P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation and Bioinformatics and Computational
Biosciences Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Elicitation of broadly neutralizing antibodies is essential for the development
of a protective vaccine against HIV-1. However, the native HIV-1 envelope adopts 
a protected conformation that conceals highly conserved sites of vulnerability
from antibody recognition. Although high-definition structures of the monomeric
core of the envelope glycoprotein subunit gp120 and, more recently, of a
stabilized soluble gp140 trimer have been solved, fundamental aspects related to 
the conformation and function of the native envelope remain unresolved. Here, we 
show that the conserved central region of the second variable loop (V2) of gp120 
contains sulfated tyrosines (Tys173 and Tys177) that in the CD4-unbound prefusion
state mediate intramolecular interaction between V2 and the conserved base of the
third variable loop (V3), functionally mimicking sulfated tyrosines in CCR5 and
anti-coreceptor-binding-site antibodies such as 412d. Recombinant gp120 expressed
in continuous cell lines displays low constitutive levels of V2 tyrosine
sulfation, which can be enhanced markedly by overexpression of the tyrosyl
sulfotransferase TPST2. In contrast, virion-associated gp120 produced by primary 
CD4(+) T cells is inherently highly sulfated. Consistent with a functional role
of the V2 sulfotyrosines, enhancement of tyrosine sulfation decreased binding and
neutralization of HIV-1 BaL by monomeric soluble CD4, 412d, and anti-V3
antibodies and increased recognition by the trimer-preferring antibodies PG9,
PG16, CH01, and PGT145. Conversely, inhibition of tyrosine sulfation increased
sensitivity to soluble CD4, 412d, and anti-V3 antibodies and diminished
recognition by trimer-preferring antibodies. These results identify the
sulfotyrosine-mediated V2-V3 interaction as a critical constraint that stabilizes
the native HIV-1 envelope trimer and modulates its sensitivity to neutralization.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1314718111 
PMCID: PMC3939864
PMID: 24569807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

