
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 11;111(10):3793-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1324266111. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

Toll-like receptor 10 is involved in induction of innate immune responses to
influenza virus infection.

Lee SM(1), Kok KH, Jaume M, Cheung TK, Yip TF, Lai JC, Guan Y, Webster RG, Jin
DY, Peiris JS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Hong Kong-Pasteur Research Pole and Centre of Influenza
Research, School of Public Health, State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious
Diseases, and Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine,
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play key roles in innate immune recognition of
pathogen-associated molecular patterns of invading microbes. Among the 10 TLR
family members identified in humans, TLR10 remains an orphan receptor without
known agonist or function. TLR10 is a pseudogene in mice and mouse models are
noninformative in this regard. Using influenza virus infection in primary human
peripheral blood monocyte-derived macrophages and a human monocytic cell line, we
now provide previously unidentified evidence that TLR10 plays a role in innate
immune responses following viral infection. Influenza virus infection increased
TLR10 expression and TLR10 contributed to innate immune sensing of viral
infection leading to cytokine induction, including proinflammatory cytokines and 
interferons. TLR10 induction is more pronounced following infection with highly
pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 virus compared with a low pathogenic H1N1 virus. 
Induction of TLR10 by virus infection requires active virus replication and de
novo protein synthesis. Culture supernatants of virus-infected cells modestly
up-regulate TLR10 expression in nonvirus-infected cells. Signaling via TLR10 was 
activated by the functional RNA-protein complex of influenza virus leading to
robust induction of cytokine expression. Taken together, our findings identify
TLR10 as an important innate immune sensor of viral infection and its role in
innate immune defense and immunopathology following viral and bacterial pathogens
deserves attention.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1324266111 
PMCID: PMC3956146
PMID: 24567377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

