
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Mar 27;10(3):e1004042. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004042.
eCollection 2014 Mar.

Structural and functional characterization of a complex between the acidic
transactivation domain of EBNA2 and the Tfb1/p62 subunit of TFIIH.

Chabot PR(1), Raiola L(1), Lussier-Price M(1), Morse T(1), Arseneault G(1),
Archambault J(2), Omichinski JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie et Médicine Moléculaire, Université de Montréal,
Succursale Centre-Ville, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Département de Biochimie et Médicine Moléculaire, Université de Montréal,
Succursale Centre-Ville, Montréal, Québec, Canada; Institut de Recherches
Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Infection with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) can lead to a number of human
diseases including Hodgkin's and Burkitt's lymphomas. The development of these
EBV-linked diseases is associated with the presence of nine viral latent
proteins, including the nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2). The EBNA2 protein plays a
crucial role in EBV infection through its ability to activate transcription of
both host and viral genes. As part of this function, EBNA2 associates with
several host transcriptional regulatory proteins, including the Tfb1/p62
(yeast/human) subunit of the general transcription factor IIH (TFIIH) and the
histone acetyltransferase CBP(CREB-binding protein)/p300, through interactions
with its C-terminal transactivation domain (TAD). In this manuscript, we examine 
the interaction of the acidic TAD of EBNA2 (residues 431-487) with the Tfb1/p62
subunit of TFIIH and CBP/p300 using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy, isothermal titration calorimeter (ITC) and transactivation studies 
in yeast. NMR studies show that the TAD of EBNA2 binds to the pleckstrin homology
(PH) domain of Tfb1 (Tfb1PH) and that residues 448-471 (EBNA2₄₄₈₋₄₇₁) are
necessary and sufficient for this interaction. NMR structural characterization of
a Tfb1PH-EBNA2₄₄₈₋₄₇₁ complex demonstrates that the intrinsically disordered TAD 
of EBNA2 forms a 9-residue α-helix in complex with Tfb1PH. Within this helix,
three hydrophobic amino acids (Trp458, Ile461 and Phe462) make a series of
important interactions with Tfb1PH and their importance is validated in ITC and
transactivation studies using mutants of EBNA2. In addition, NMR studies indicate
that the same region of EBNA2 is also required for binding to the KIX domain of
CBP/p300. This study provides an atomic level description of interactions
involving the TAD of EBNA2 with target host proteins. In addition, comparison of 
the Tfb1PH-EBNA2₄₄₈₋₄₇₁ complex with structures of the TAD of p53 and VP16 bound 
to Tfb1PH highlights the versatility of intrinsically disordered acidic TADs in
recognizing common target host proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004042 
PMCID: PMC3968163
PMID: 24675874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

