
1. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(13):7199-209. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00225-14. Epub 2014 Apr 9.

hnRNP L and NF90 interact with hepatitis C virus 5'-terminal untranslated RNA and
promote efficient replication.

Li Y(1), Masaki T(1), Shimakami T(1), Lemon SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Microbiology Immunology, and Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Departments of Medicine and Microbiology Immunology, and Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA smlemon@med.unc.edu.

The 5'-terminal sequence of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) positive-strand RNA
genome is essential for viral replication. Critical host factors, including a
miR-122/Ago2 complex and poly(rC)-binding protein 2 (PCBP2), associate with this 
RNA segment. We used a biotinylated RNA pulldown approach to isolate host factors
binding to the HCV 5' terminal 47 nucleotides and, in addition to Ago2 and PCBP2,
identified several novel proteins, including IGF2BP1, hnRNP L, DHX9, ADAR1, and
NF90 (ILF3). PCBP2, IGF2BP1, and hnRNP L bound single-stranded RNA, while DHX9,
ADAR1, and NF90 bound a cognate double-stranded RNA bait. PCBP2, IGF2BP1, and
hnRNP L binding were blocked by preannealing the single-stranded RNA bait with
miR-122, indicating that they bind the RNA in competition with miR-122. However, 
IGF2BP1 binding was also inhibited by high concentrations of heparin, suggesting 
that it bound the bait nonspecifically. Among these proteins, small interfering
RNA-mediated depletion of hnRNP L and NF90 significantly impaired viral
replication and reduced infectious virus yields without substantially affecting
HCV internal ribosome entry site-mediated translation. hnRNP L and NF90 were
found to associate with HCV RNA in infected cells and to coimmunoprecipitate with
NS5A in an RNA-dependent manner. Both also associate with detergent-resistant
membranes where viral replication complexes reside. We conclude that hnRNP and
NF90 are important host factors for HCV replication, at least in cultured cells, 
and may be present in the replication complex.IMPORTANCE: Although HCV
replication has been intensively studied in many laboratories, many aspects of
the viral life cycle remain obscure. Here, we use a novel RNA pulldown strategy
coupled with mass spectrometry to identify host cell proteins that interact
functionally with regulatory RNA elements located at the extreme 5' end of the
positive-strand RNA genome. We identify two, primarily nuclear RNA-binding
proteins, hnRNP L and NF90, with previously unrecognized proviral roles in HCV
replication. The data presented add to current understanding of the replication
cycle of this pathogenic human virus.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00225-14 
PMCID: PMC4054450
PMID: 24719423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

