
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 30;289(22):15718-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.572099. Epub
2014 Apr 10.

The accessory factor Nef links HIV-1 to Tec/Btk kinases in an Src homology 3
domain-dependent manner.

Tarafdar S(1), Poe JA(2), Smithgall TE(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15219 and the Department 
of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, University of Pittsburgh Graduate School
of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261.
(2)From the Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15219 and.
(3)From the Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15219 and
tsmithga@pitt.edu.

The HIV-1 Nef virulence factor interacts with multiple host cell-signaling
proteins. Nef binds to the Src homology 3 domains of Src family kinases,
resulting in kinase activation important for viral infectivity, replication, and 
MHC-I down-regulation. Itk and other Tec family kinases are also present in HIV
target cells, and Itk has been linked to HIV-1 infectivity and replication.
However, the molecular mechanism linking Itk to HIV-1 is unknown. In this study, 
we explored the interaction of Nef with Tec family kinases using a cell-based
bimolecular fluorescence complementation assay. In this approach, interaction of 
Nef with a partner kinase juxtaposes nonfluorescent YFP fragments fused to the C 
terminus of each protein, resulting in YFP complementation and a bright
fluorescent signal. Using bimolecular fluorescence complementation, we observed
that Nef interacts with the Tec family members Bmx, Btk, and Itk but not Tec or
Txk. Interaction with Nef occurs through the kinase Src homology 3 domains and
localizes to the plasma membrane. Allelic variants of Nef from all major HIV-1
subtypes interacted strongly with Itk in this assay, demonstrating the highly
conserved nature of this interaction. A selective small molecule inhibitor of Itk
kinase activity (BMS-509744) potently blocked wild-type HIV-1 infectivity and
replication, but not that of a Nef-defective mutant. Nef induced constitutive Itk
activation in transfected cells that was sensitive to inhibitor treatment. Taken 
together, these results provide the first evidence that Nef interacts with
cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases of the Tec family and suggest that Nef provides a
mechanistic link between HIV-1 and Itk signaling in the viral life cycle.

Â© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.572099 
PMCID: PMC4140925
PMID: 24722985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

