
1. J Virol. 2014 Aug;88(16):9429-41. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00511-14. Epub 2014 Jun 11.

Modulation of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus interleukin-6 function by
hypoxia-upregulated protein 1.

Giffin L(1), Yan F(2), Ben Major M(2), Damania B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA damania@med.unc.edu.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(21):12932.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV, also called human herpesvirus 8)
is linked to the development of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), primary effusion lymphoma 
(PEL), and multicentric Castleman's disease (MCD). KSHV expresses several
proteins that modulate host cell signaling pathways. One of these proteins is
viral interleukin-6 (vIL-6), which is a homolog of human IL-6 (hIL-6). vIL-6 is
able to prevent apoptosis and promote proinflammatory signaling, angiogenesis,
and cell proliferation. Although it can be secreted, vIL-6 is mainly an
intracellular protein that is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We
performed affinity purification and mass spectrometry to identify novel vIL-6
binding partners and found that a cellular ER chaperone, hypoxia-upregulated
protein 1 (HYOU1), interacts with vIL-6. Immunohistochemical staining reveals
that both PEL and KS tumor tissues express significant amounts of HYOU1. We also 
show that HYOU1 increases endogenous vIL-6 protein levels and that HYOU1
facilitates vIL-6-induced JAK/STAT signaling, migration, and survival in
endothelial cells. Furthermore, our data suggest that HYOU1 also modulates
vIL-6's ability to induce CCL2, a chemokine involved in cell migration. Finally, 
we investigated the impact of HYOU1 on cellular hIL-6 signaling. Collectively,
our data indicate that HYOU1 is important for vIL-6 function and may play a role 
in the pathogenesis of KSHV-associated cancers.IMPORTANCE: KSHV vIL-6 is
detectable in all KSHV-associated malignancies and promotes tumorigenesis and
inflammation. We identified a cellular protein, called hypoxia-upregulated
protein 1 (HYOU1), that interacts with KSHV vIL-6 and is present in KSHV-infected
tumors. Our data suggest that HYOU1 facilitates the vIL-6-induced signaling,
migration, and survival of endothelial cells.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00511-14 
PMCID: PMC4136275
PMID: 24920810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

