
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jul 10;10(7):e1004253. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004253.
eCollection 2014 Jul.

Oncogenic herpesvirus KSHV Hijacks BMP-Smad1-Id signaling to promote
tumorigenesis.

Liang D(1), Hu H(1), Li S(1), Dong J(1), Wang X(1), Wang Y(1), He L(1), He Z(1), 
Gao Y(1), Gao SJ(2), Lan K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Institut Pasteur of
Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is the etiological agent of
Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), a malignancy commonly found in AIDS patients. Whether KS
is a true neoplasm or hyperplasia has been a subject of intensive debate until
recently when KSHV is unequivocally shown to efficiently infect, immortalize and 
transform rat primary mesenchymal precursor cells (MM). Moreover,
KSHV-transformed MM cells (KMM) efficiently induce tumors with hallmark features 
of KS when inoculated into nude mice. Here, we showed Smad1 as a novel binding
protein of KSHV latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA). LANA interacted with
and sustained BMP-activated p-Smad1 in the nucleus and enhanced its loading on
the Id promoters. As a result, Ids were significantly up-regulated in KMM cells
and abundantly expressed in human KS lesions. Strikingly, genetic and chemical
inhibition of the BMP-Smad1-Id pathway blocked the oncogenic phenotype of
KSHV-transformed cells in vitro and in vivo. These findings illustrate a novel
mechanism by which a tumor virus hijacks and converts a developmental pathway
into an indispensable oncogenic pathway for tumorigenesis. Importantly, our
results demonstrate the efficacy of targeting the BMP-Smad1-Id pathway for
inhibiting the growth of KSHV-induced tumors, and therefore identify the BMP
pathway as a promising therapeutic target for KS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004253 
PMCID: PMC4092152
PMID: 25010525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

