
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Nov;13(11):3040-8. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.028977. Epub
2014 Jul 20.

A novel immuno-competitive capture mass spectrometry strategy for protein-protein
interaction profiling reveals that LATS kinases regulate HCV replication through 
NS5A phosphorylation.

Meistermann H(1), Gao J(2), Golling S(1), Lamerz J(1), Le Pogam S(2), Tzouros
M(1), Sankabathula S(2), Gruenbaum L(2), Nájera I(2), Langen H(1), Klumpp K(2),
Augustin A(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the ‡Pharma Research and Early Development Department, F. Hoffmann-La
Roche Ltd, Basel 4070, Switzerland and.
(2)the ¶Pharma Research and Early Development Department, F. Hoffmann-La Roche
Ltd, Nutley, NJ, 07110-1199.
(3)From the ‡Pharma Research and Early Development Department, F. Hoffmann-La
Roche Ltd, Basel 4070, Switzerland and angelique.augustin@roche.com.

Mapping protein-protein interactions is essential to fully characterize the
biological function of a protein and improve our understanding of diseases.
Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) using selective
antibodies against a target protein has been commonly applied to study protein
complexes. However, one major limitation is a lack of specificity as a
substantial part of the proposed binders is due to nonspecific interactions.
Here, we describe an innovative immuno-competitive capture mass spectrometry
(ICC-MS) method to allow systematic investigation of protein-protein
interactions. ICC-MS markedly increases the specificity of classical
immunoprecipitation (IP) by introducing a competition step between free and
capturing antibody prior to IP. Instead of comparing only one experimental sample
with a control, the methodology generates a 12-concentration antibody competition
profile. Label-free quantitation followed by a robust statistical analysis of the
data is then used to extract the cellular interactome of a protein of interest
and to filter out background proteins. We applied this new approach to
specifically map the interactome of hepatitis C virus (HCV) nonstructural protein
5A (NS5A) in a cellular HCV replication system and uncovered eight new
NS5A-interacting protein candidates along with two previously validated binding
partners. Follow-up biological validation experiments revealed that large tumor
suppressor homolog 1 and 2 (LATS1 and LATS2, respectively), two closely related
human protein kinases, are novel host kinases responsible for NS5A
phosphorylation at a highly conserved position required for optimal HCV genome
replication. These results are the first illustration of the value of ICC-MS for 
the analysis of endogenous protein complexes to identify biologically relevant
protein-protein interactions with high specificity.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M113.028977 
PMCID: PMC4223490
PMID: 25044019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

