
1. Retrovirology. 2014 Aug 13;11:67. doi: 10.1186/s12977-014-0067-y.

NUCKS1, a novel Tat coactivator, plays a crucial role in HIV-1 replication by
increasing Tat-mediated viral transcription on the HIV-1 LTR promoter.

Kim HY, Choi BS, Kim SS, Roh TY, Park J, Yoon CH.

BACKGROUND: Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) Tat protein plays an essential
role in HIV gene transcription from the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) and
replication. Transcriptional activity of Tat is modulated by several host
factors, but the mechanism responsible for Tat regulation by host factors is not 
understood fully.
RESULTS: Using a yeast two-hybrid screening system, we identified Nuclear
ubiquitous casein and cyclin-dependent kinase substrate 1 (NUCKS1) as a novel
Tat-interacting partner. Here, we report its function as a positive regulator of 
Tat. In a coimmunoprecipitation assay, HIV-1 Tat interacted sufficiently with
both endogenous and ectopically expressed NUCKS1. In a reporter assay, ectopic
expression of NUCKS1 significantly increased Tat-mediated transcription of the
HIV-1 LTR, whereas knockdown of NUCKS1 by small interfering RNA diminished
Tat-mediated transcription of the HIV-1 LTR. We also investigated which mechanism
contributes to NUCKS1-mediated Tat activation. In a chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay (ChIP), knockdown of NUCKS1 interrupted the accumulation of Tat in the
transactivation-responsive (TAR) region on the LTR, which then led to suppression
of viral replication. However, NUCKS1 expression did not increase Tat nuclear
localization and interaction with Cyclin T1. Interestingly, the NUCKS1 expression
level was lower in latently HIV-1-infected cells than in uninfected parent cells.
Besides, expression level of NUCKS1 was markedly induced, which then facilitated 
HIV-1 reactivation in latently infected cells.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our data demonstrate clearly that NUCKS1 is a novel
Tat coactivator that is required for Tat-mediated HIV-1 transcription and
replication, and that it may contribute to HIV-1 reactivation in latently HIV-1
infected cells.

DOI: 10.1186/s12977-014-0067-y 
PMCID: PMC4181878
PMID: 25116364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

