
1. J Proteome Res. 2014 Nov 7;13(11):5120-35. doi: 10.1021/pr500556d. Epub 2014 Oct 
23.

Elucidation of the Ebola virus VP24 cellular interactome and disruption of virus 
biology through targeted inhibition of host-cell protein function.

Garc√≠a-Dorival I(1), Wu W, Dowall S, Armstrong S, Touzelet O, Wastling J, Barr
JN, Matthews D, Carroll M, Hewson R, Hiscox JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health,
University of Liverpool , Liverpool L3 5RF, United Kingdom.

Viral pathogenesis in the infected cell is a balance between antiviral responses 
and subversion of host-cell processes. Many viral proteins specifically interact 
with host-cell proteins to promote virus biology. Understanding these
interactions can lead to knowledge gains about infection and provide potential
targets for antiviral therapy. One such virus is Ebola, which has profound
consequences for human health and causes viral hemorrhagic fever where case
fatality rates can approach 90%. The Ebola virus VP24 protein plays a critical
role in the evasion of the host immune response and is likely to interact with
multiple cellular proteins. To map these interactions and better understand the
potential functions of VP24, label-free quantitative proteomics was used to
identify cellular proteins that had a high probability of forming the VP24
cellular interactome. Several known interactions were confirmed, thus placing
confidence in the technique, but new interactions were also discovered including 
one with ATP1A1, which is involved in osmoregulation and cell signaling.
Disrupting the activity of ATP1A1 in Ebola-virus-infected cells with a small
molecule inhibitor resulted in a decrease in progeny virus, thus illustrating how
quantitative proteomics can be used to identify potential therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1021/pr500556d 
PMID: 25158218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

