
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 7;111(40):E4244-53. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1409986111. Epub 2014 Sep 8.

Involvement of the host DNA-repair enzyme TDP2 in formation of the covalently
closed circular DNA persistence reservoir of hepatitis B viruses.

Königer C(1), Wingert I(2), Marsmann M(2), Rösler C(2), Beck J(3), Nassal M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 2/Molecular Biology, University Hospital
Freiburg, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany; and Faculty of Biology, University of
Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine 2/Molecular Biology, University Hospital
Freiburg, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany; and.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine 2/Molecular Biology, University Hospital
Freiburg, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany; and juergen.beck@uniklinik-freiburg.de
nassal2@ukl.uni-freiburg.de.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV), the causative agent of chronic hepatitis B and
prototypic hepadnavirus, is a small DNA virus that replicates by protein-primed
reverse transcription. The product is a 3-kb relaxed circular DNA (RC-DNA) in
which one strand is linked to the viral polymerase (P protein) through a
tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiester bond. Upon infection, the incoming RC-DNA is converted
into covalently closed circular (ccc) DNA, which serves as a viral persistence
reservoir that is refractory to current anti-HBV treatments. The mechanism of
cccDNA formation is unknown, but the release of P protein is one mandatory step. 
Structural similarities between RC-DNA and cellular topoisomerase-DNA adducts and
their known repair by tyrosyl-DNA-phosphodiesterase (TDP) 1 or TDP2 suggested
that HBV may usurp these enzymes for its own purpose. Here we demonstrate that
human and chicken TDP2, but only the yeast ortholog of TDP1, can specifically
cleave the Tyr-DNA bond in virus-adapted model substrates and release P protein
from authentic HBV and duck HBV (DHBV) RC-DNA in vitro, without prior proteolysis
of the large P proteins. Consistent with TPD2's having a physiological role in
cccDNA formation, RNAi-mediated TDP2 depletion in human cells significantly
slowed the conversion of RC-DNA to cccDNA. Ectopic TDP2 expression in the same
cells restored faster conversion kinetics. These data strongly suggest that TDP2 
is a first, although likely not the only, host DNA-repair factor involved in HBV 
cccDNA biogenesis. In addition to establishing a functional link between
hepadnaviruses and DNA repair, our results open new prospects for directly
targeting HBV persistence.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1409986111 
PMCID: PMC4209993
PMID: 25201958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

