
1. J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(22):13099-110. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02103-14. Epub 2014 Sep 10.

Matrix proteins of Nipah and Hendra viruses interact with beta subunits of AP-3
complexes.

Sun W(1), McCrory TS(1), Khaw WY(1), Petzing S(2), Myers T(1), Schmitt AP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA Center for Molecular Immunology
and Infectious Disease, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania, USA aps13@psu.edu.

Paramyxoviruses and other negative-strand RNA viruses encode matrix proteins that
coordinate the virus assembly process. The matrix proteins link the viral
glycoproteins and the viral ribonucleoproteins at virus assembly sites and often 
recruit host machinery that facilitates the budding process. Using a co-affinity 
purification strategy, we have identified the beta subunit of the AP-3 adapter
protein complex, AP3B1, as a binding partner for the M proteins of the zoonotic
paramyxoviruses Nipah virus and Hendra virus. Binding function was localized to
the serine-rich and acidic Hinge domain of AP3B1, and a 29-amino-acid
Hinge-derived polypeptide was sufficient for M protein binding in
coimmunoprecipitation assays. Virus-like particle (VLP) production assays were
used to assess the relationship between AP3B1 binding and M protein function. We 
found that for both Nipah virus and Hendra virus, M protein expression in the
absence of any other viral proteins led to the efficient production of VLPs in
transfected cells, and this VLP production was potently inhibited upon
overexpression of short M-binding polypeptides derived from the Hinge region of
AP3B1. Both human and bat (Pteropus alecto) AP3B1-derived polypeptides were
highly effective at inhibiting the production of VLPs. VLP production was also
impaired through small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated depletion of AP3B1 from
cells. These findings suggest that AP-3-directed trafficking processes are
important for henipavirus particle production and identify a new host
protein-virus protein binding interface that could become a useful target in
future efforts to develop small molecule inhibitors to combat paramyxoviral
infections.IMPORTANCE: Henipaviruses cause deadly infections in humans, with a
mortality rate of about 40%. Hendra virus outbreaks in Australia, all involving
horses and some involving transmission to humans, have been a continuing problem.
Nipah virus caused a large outbreak in Malaysia in 1998, killing 109 people, and 
smaller outbreaks have since occurred in Bangladesh and India. In this study, we 
have defined, for the first time, host factors that interact with henipavirus M
proteins and contribute to viral particle assembly. We have also defined a new
host protein-viral protein binding interface that can potentially be targeted for
the inhibition of paramyxovirus infections.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02103-14 
PMCID: PMC4249102
PMID: 25210190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

