
1. J Virol. 2014 Dec;88(24):14222-31. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01763-14. Epub 2014 Oct 1.

The 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase 3 enzyme potently synthesizes the
2'-5'-oligoadenylates required for RNase L activation.

Ibsen MS(1), Gad HH(1), Thavachelvam K(1), Boesen T(1), Desprès P(2), Hartmann
R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Structural Biology, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Unité Interactions Moléculaires Flavivirus-Hôtes, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.
(3)Centre for Structural Biology, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark rh@mb.au.dk.

The members of the oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS) family of proteins are
antiviral restriction factors that target a wide range of RNA and DNA viruses.
They function as intracellular double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) sensors that, upon
binding to dsRNA, undergo a conformational change and are activated to synthesize
2'-5'-linked oligoadenylates (2-5As). 2-5As of sufficient length act as second
messengers to activate RNase L and thereby restrict viral replication. We
expressed human OAS3 using the baculovirus system and purified it to homogeneity.
We show that recombinant OAS3 is activated at a substantially lower concentration
of dsRNA than OAS1, making it a potent in vivo sensor of dsRNA. Moreover, we find
that OAS3 synthesizes considerably longer 2-5As than previously reported, and
that OAS3 can activate RNase L intracellularly. The combined high affinity for
dsRNA and the capability to produce 2-5As of sufficient length to activate RNase 
L suggests that OAS3 is a potent activator of RNase L. In addition, we provide
experimental evidence to support one active site of OAS3 located in the
C-terminal OAS domain and generate a low-resolution structure of OAS3 using
SAXS.IMPORTANCE: We are the first to purify the OAS3 enzyme to homogeneity, which
allowed us to characterize the mechanism utilized by OAS3 and identify the active
site. We provide compelling evidence that OAS3 can produce 2'-5'-oligoadenylates 
of sufficient length to activate RNase L. This is contrary to what is described
in the current literature but agrees with recent in vivo data showing that OAS3
harbors an antiviral activity requiring RNase L. Thus, our work redefines our
understanding of the biological role of OAS3. Furthermore, we used a combination 
of mutagenesis and small-angle X-ray scattering to describe the active site and
low-resolution structure of OAS3.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01763-14 
PMCID: PMC4249133
PMID: 25275129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

