
1. Virology. 1995 Aug 20;211(2):451-61.

Poliovirus protease 3C mediates cleavage of microtubule-associated protein 4.

Joachims M(1), Harris KS, Etchison D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City 66160, USA.

Poliovirus infection results in a number of host cell changes, including specific
alterations in cellular proteins. This study further characterizes the cleavage
of a cytoskeletal protein, microtubule-associated protein 4 (MAP-4) and
investigates the identity of the viral protease which mediates its cleavage.
MAP-4 cleavage by poliovirus was previously identified using a monoclonal
antibody (M. Joachims and D. Etchison, 1992, J. Virol. 66, 5997-5804). In this
study, MAP-4 cleavage was found to occur in cells infected by only some
picornaviruses, poliovirus and human rhinovirus 14. Infection by other types of
viruses, vesicular stomatitis virus and adenovirus, or by other types of
picornaviruses, encephalomyocarditis virus, did not result in MAP-4 cleavage. To 
determine the viral mediator of MAP-4 cleavage, the effects of purified
poliovirus proteases on MAP-4 integrity were examined by immunoblot. When MAP-4
substrates were incubated with concentrations of poliovirus 2A that were more
than sufficient to induce p220 cleavage, there was no effect on MAP-4. However,
when MAP-4 substrates were incubated with purified 3C protease (3Cpro), cleavage 
products were detected that were identical in size to those generated in vivo in 
poliovirus-infected cells; the use of a mutant 3C protease did not result in
MAP-4 cleavage. Cleavage of MAP-4 was also demonstrated with purified 3CDpro, and
the in vitro cleavage kinetics were examined. Indirect immunofluorescence
revealed that MAP-4 cleavage also correlated with a marked "collapse" of
microtubules during late infection, indicating a possible relationship between
3Cpro-mediated MAP-4 cleavage and changes in the microtubule system of infected
cells.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1995.1427 
PMID: 7645249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

