
1. J Virol. 1995 Mar;69(3):1842-50.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Nef protein inhibits activation pathways in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and T-cell lines.

Greenway A(1), Azad A, McPhee D.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Cellular Biology Unit, National Centre in HIV Virology Research,
Macfarlane Burnet Centre for Medical Research, Fairfield, Victoria, Australia.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Nef protein causes the loss of cell
surface CD4 and interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor (Tac) from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) and CD4+ T-cell lines. As both CD4 and the IL-2 receptor
play crucial roles in antigen-driven helper T-cell signalling and T-cell
proliferation, respectively, the role of Nef in the viral life cycle may be to
perturb signalling pathways emanating from these receptors. However, the
intracellular targets for Nef that result in receptor down-regulation are
unknown. Using a recombinant glutathione S-transferase-full-length 27 kDa Nef
(Nef27) fusion protein, produced in Escherichia coli by translation from the
first start codon of HIV-1 nef clone pNL4-3, as an affinity reagent to probe
cytoplasmic extracts of MT-2 cells and PBMC, we have shown interaction with at
least seven host cell protein species ranging from 24 to 75 kDa. Immunoblotting
identified four of these proteins as p56lck, CD4, p53, and p44mapk/erk1, all of
which are intimately involved in intracellular signalling. To assess the
relevance of these interactions and further define the biochemical activity of
Nef in signal transduction pathways, highly purified Nef27 protein was introduced
directly into PBMC by electroporation. Nef27-treated PBMC showed reduced
proliferative responsiveness to exogenous recombinant IL-2. Normally, stimulation
of T-cells by IL-2 or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate provokes both augmentation 
of p56lck activity and corresponding posttranslational modification of p56lck.
These changes were also inhibited by treatment of PBMC with Nef, suggesting that 
Nef interferes with activation of p56lck and as a consequence of signalling via
the IL-2 receptor. Further evidence for Nef interfering with cell proliferation
was the decreased production of the proto-oncogene c-myb, which is required for
cell cycle progression, in Nef-treated MT-2 cells. In contrast to the binding
characteristics and biological effects of Nef27, the alternate 25-kDa isoform of 
Nef (Nef25) produced by translation from the second start codon of HIV nef pNL4-3
(57 nucleotide residues downstream) was shown to interact with only three
cellular proteins of approximately 26, 28, and 56 kDa from PBMC and MT-2 cells,
one of which was identified as p56lck. Also, proliferation and posttranslational 
modification of p56lck in response to IL-2 stimulation were not profoundly
affected by treatment of PBMC with Nef25 compared with Nef27.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED 
AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.3.1842-1850.1995 
PMCID: PMC188795
PMID: 7853525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

