
1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 29;272(35):21818-23.

Borna disease virus P-protein is phosphorylated by protein kinase Cepsilon and
casein kinase II.

Schwemmle M(1), De B, Shi L, Banerjee A, Lipkin WI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neurovirology, Department of Neurology, Anatomy and
Neurobiology, and Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, 
Irvine, California 92697-4290, USA.

Borna disease virus (BDV) is a newly classified nonsegmented negative-strand RNA 
virus (order of Mononegavirales) that persistently infects specific brain regions
and circuits of warm-blooded animals to cause behavioral disturbances. Viruses
within the order of Mononegavirales have phosphoproteins that typically serve as 
transcription factors and are modulated in functional activity through
phosphorylation. To identify the kinases involved in BDV phosphoprotein (BDV-P)
phosphorylation, in vitro phosphorylation assays were performed using recombinant
phosphoprotein produced in Escherichia coli as substrate and cytoplasmic extracts
from a rat glioma cell line (C6) or rat brain extracts as sources of kinase
activity. These experiments revealed that BDV-P was phosphorylated predominantly 
by protein kinase C (PKC) and to a lesser extent by casein kinase II. Partial
purification of the PKC from rat brain extract suggested that the BDV-P
phosphorylating kinase is PKCepsilon. A role for PKC phosphorylation in vivo was 
confirmed by using the PKC-specific inhibitor GF109203X. Furthermore, peptide
mapping studies indicated that BDV-P is phosphorylated at the same sites in vitro
as it is in vivo. Mutational analysis identified Ser26 and Ser28 as sites for PKC
phosphorylation and Ser70 and Ser86 as sites for casein kinase II
phosphorylation. The anatomic distribution of PKCepsilon in the central nervous
system may have implications for BDV neurotropism and pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.35.21818 
PMID: 9268312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

