
1. Scand J Immunol. 1997 Oct;46(4):331-7.

Serum amyloid P component binds to influenza A virus haemagglutinin and inhibits 
the virus infection in vitro.

Andersen O(1), Vilsgaard Ravn K, Juul SÃ¸rensen I, Jonson G, Holm Nielsen E,
Svehag SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Odense University, Denmark.

Serum amyloid P component (SAP) is a member of the phylogenetically conserved and
structurally related group of proteins called pentraxins. SAP exhibits
multispecific calcium-dependent binding to oligosaccharides with terminal
N-acetyl-galactosamine, mannose and glucuronic acid. The authors report that SAP 
can bind to influenza A virus and inhibit agglutination of erythrocytes mediated 
by the virus subtypes H1N1, H2N2 and H3N2. SAP also inhibits the production of
haemagglutinin (HA) an the cytopathogenic effect of influenza A virus in MDCK
cells. The binding of SAP to the virus requires physiological calcium
concentrations and is blocked by specific SAP antibodies. Denaturated and
renaturated SAP retained inhibition of HA. Electron microscopy shows
Ca(2+)-dependent binding of SAP to spikes on the viral envelope and
immunoblotting indicates that SAP binds to a 50-55 kDa peptide corresponding to
the mass of the HA1 peptide. Of several monosaccharides tested only D-mannose
interfered with SAP's inhibition of both HA and infectivity. The
glycosaminoglycans heparan sulfate and heparin, which bind SAP, reduced SAPs
binding to the virus. The results indicate that the inhibition by SAP is due to
steric effects when SAP binds to terminal mannose on oligosaccharides localized
close to the sialic acid-binding site of the HA trimer.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3083.1997.d01-147.x 
PMID: 9350282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

