
1. J Virol. 1998 Jan;72(1):693-700.

Characterization of the CBF2 binding site within the Epstein-Barr virus latency C
promoter and its role in modulating EBNA2-mediated transactivation.

Fuentes-Panan√° EM(1), Ling PD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) EBNA2 protein is a transcriptional activator that
regulates viral and cellular gene expression and is also essential for EBV-driven
immortalization of B lymphocytes. The EBNA2-responsive enhancer in the viral
latency C promoter (Cp) binds two cellular factors, CBF1 and CBF2. The precise
role of the CBF2 protein for Cp enhancer function is presently unclear. CBF2 does
not appear to interact with EBNA2 and binds just downstream of CBF1 between
positions -339 and -368 in the Cp EBNA2 enhancer. Within this region an 8-bp
sequence, CAGTGCGT, can be found, and a similar sequence is also located
downstream of CBF1 binding sites in other EBNA2-responsive promoters. Previous
studies have indicated that mutations and methylation in this sequence affect
EBNA2 responsiveness. To investigate the requirements for CBF2 binding, we
synthesized a series of oligonucleotides carrying double transversion mutations
spanning both the conserved core sequence and outside flanking sequences.
Surprisingly, mutations outside of the conserved core sequence in 4 bases
immediately flanking the 5' end, GGTT, had the most deleterious effect on CBF2
binding. Mutations in the conserved core had a gradient effect, with those near
the 5' end having the most deleterious effects on CBF2 binding. In addition, the 
affinities of CBF2 for binding to the LMP-1, LMP-2, and CD23 promoters were also 
measured. These promoters contain the conserved core but lack the 5' flanking
GGTT motif and bound CBF2 weakly or not at all. Using Cp reporter plasmids
containing CBF2 mutant binding sites, we were also able to show that at lower
doses of EBNA2, Cp transactivation required a functional CBF2 binding site but
that higher doses of EBNA2 transactivated CBF2 mutant promoters to 40% of
wild-type levels. These assays indicate that CBF2 is important for EBNA2-mediated
transactivation of the viral latency Cp. In addition, CBF2 activity was found to 
be associated with two polypeptides of 27 and 33 kDa.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.1.693-700.1998 
PMCID: PMC109424
PMID: 9420275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

