
1. J Virol. 1998 Feb;72(2):1671-6.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 matrix protein interacts with cellular
protein HO3.

Lama J(1), Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The matrix (MA) protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) plays a
critical role in virion morphogenesis and fulfills important functions during the
early steps of infection. In an effort to identify cellular partners of MA, a
Saccharomyces cerevisiae two-hybrid screen was utilized. A specific interaction
between MA and HO3, a putative histidyl-tRNA synthetase, was demonstrated in this
system. HO3-specific mRNA was detected in several tissues relevant for HIV
infection, such as spleen, thymus, and peripheral blood lymphocytes, as well as
in a number of T-lymphoid-cell lines. The binding of MA to HO3 was confirmed in
transfected cells by coimmunoprecipitation. This interaction was abrogated by
replacing two lysine residues at positions 26 and 27 of MA by threonine
(MA(KK27TT)). HO3 localized both to the cytoplasm and to the nucleus of acutely
transfected 293T cells. When overexpressed in HIV-1-producing cells, HO3 was
incorporated into wild-type virions but not in ones containing the
dilysine-mutated variant of MA. Correspondingly, overexpression of HO3 in virus
producer cells enhanced the infectivity of wild-type but not MA(KK27AA) HIV-1
particles. The stimulating effect of HO3 was independent from the presence of
Envelope, Vpr, or Vpu. Taken together, these results suggest that HO3, through
its recognition of MA, plays a role in the life cycle of HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.2.1671-1676.1998 
PMCID: PMC124654
PMID: 9445076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

