
1. EMBO J. 1998 Feb 16;17(4):909-17.

Viral protein R regulates nuclear import of the HIV-1 pre-integration complex.

Popov S(1), Rexach M, Zybarth G, Reiling N, Lee MA, Ratner L, Lane CM, Moore MS, 
Blobel G, Bukrinsky M.

Author information: 
(1)The Picower Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.

Replication of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) in non-dividing cells 
critically depends on import of the viral pre-integration complex into the
nucleus. Genetic evidence suggests that viral protein R (Vpr) and matrix antigen 
(MA) are directly involved in the import process. An in vitro assay that
reconstitutes nuclear import of HIV-1 pre-integration complexes in
digitonin-permeabilized cells was used to demonstrate that Vpr is the key
regulator of the viral nuclear import process. Mutant HIV-1 pre-integration
complexes that lack Vpr failed to be imported in vitro, whereas mutants that lack
a functional MA nuclear localization sequence (NLS) were only partially
defective. Strikingly, the import defect of the Vpr- mutant was rescued when
recombinant Vpr was re-added. In addition, import of Vpr- virus was rescued by
adding the cytosol of HeLa cells, where HIV-1 replication had been shown to be
Vpr-independent. In a solution binding assay, Vpr associated with karyopherin
alpha, a cellular receptor for NLSs. This association increased the affinity of
karyopherin alpha for basic-type NLSs, including that of MA, thus explaining the 
positive effect of Vpr on nuclear import of the HIV-1 pre-integration complex and
BSA-NLS conjugates. These results identify the biochemical mechanism of Vpr
function in transport of the viral pre-integration complex to, and across, the
nuclear membrane.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/17.4.909 
PMCID: PMC1170440
PMID: 9463369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

