
1. J Virol. 1998 Apr;72(4):2962-8.

Ubiquitin is covalently attached to the p6Gag proteins of human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 and simian immunodeficiency virus and to the p12Gag protein of
Moloney murine leukemia virus.

Ott DE(1), Coren LV, Copeland TD, Kane BP, Johnson DG, Sowder RC 2nd, Yoshinaka
Y, Oroszlan S, Arthur LO, Henderson LE.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Vaccine Program, SAIC/Frederick, National Cancer Institute, Frederick
Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.
ott@avpvx1.ncifcrf.gov

Host proteins are incorporated into retroviral virions during assembly and
budding. We have examined three retroviruses, human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1), simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV), and Moloney murine leukemia virus
(Mo-MuLV), for the presence of ubiquitin inside each of these virions. After a
protease treatment to remove exterior viral as well as contaminating cellular
proteins, the proteins remaining inside the virion were analyzed. The results
presented here show that all three virions incorporate ubiquitin molecules at
approximately 10% of the level of Gag found in virions. In addition to free
ubiquitin, covalent ubiquitin-Gag complexes were detected, isolated, and
characterized from all three viruses. Our immunoblot and protein sequencing
results on treated virions showed that approximately 2% of either HIV-1 or SIV
p6Gag was covalently attached to a single ubiquitin molecule inside the
respective virions and that approximately 2 to 5% of the p12Gag in Mo-MuLV
virions was monoubiquitinated. These results show that ubiquitination of Gag is
conserved among these retroviruses and occurs in the p6Gag portion of the Gag
polyprotein, a region that is likely to be involved in assembly and budding.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.4.2962-2968.1998 
PMCID: PMC109742
PMID: 9525617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

