
1. J Virol. 1998 Jul;72(7):5802-10.

HveA (herpesvirus entry mediator A), a coreceptor for herpes simplex virus entry,
also participates in virus-induced cell fusion.

Terry-Allison T(1), Montgomery RI, Whitbeck JC, Xu R, Cohen GH, Eisenberg RJ,
Spear PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether a cell surface protein that
can serve as coreceptor for herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) entry,
herpesvirus entry mediator (previously designated HVEM but renamed HveA), also
mediates HSV-1-induced cell-cell fusion. We found that transfection of DNA from
KOS-804, a previously described HSV-1 syncytial (Syn) strain whose Syn mutation
was mapped to an amino acid substitution in gK, induced numerous large syncytia
on HveA-expressing Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO-HVEM12) but not on control
cells (CHO-C8). Antibodies specific for gD as well as for HveA were effective
inhibitors of KOS-804-induced fusion, consistent with previously described direct
interactions between gD and HveA. Since mutations in gD determine the ability of 
HSV-1 to utilize HveA for entry, we examined whether the form of virally
expressed gD also influenced the ability of HveA to mediate fusion. We produced a
recombinant virus carrying the KOS-804 Syn mutation and the KOS-Rid1 gD mutation,
which significantly reduces viral entry via HveA, and designated it KOS-SR1.
KOS-SR1 DNA had a markedly reduced ability to induce syncytia on CHO-HVEM12 cells
and a somewhat enhanced ability to induce syncytia on CHO-C8 cells. These results
support previous findings concerning the relative abilities of KOS and KOS-Rid1
to infect CHO-HVEM12 and CHO-C8 cells. Thus, HveA mediates cell-cell fusion as
well as viral entry and both activities of HveA are contingent upon the form of
gD expressed by the virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.7.5802-5810.1998 
PMCID: PMC110382
PMID: 9621040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

