
1. Virology. 1998 Jun 20;246(1):145-57.

Functional modules important for activated expression of early genes of herpes
simplex virus type 1 are clustered upstream of the TATA box.

Pande NT(1), Petroski MD, Wagner EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine 92697, USA.

Functional analysis of two promoters controlling early herpes simplex virus type 
1 (HSV-1) transcripts encoding the UL37 and UL50 (dUTPase) proteins are described
in this report. Transcripts expressed under the control of these promoters were
found to be expressed early regardless of the position of the transcription unit 
within the viral genome. Despite this, wt dUTPase mRNA was 6-10 times more
abundant than the UL37 transcript both in wt and recombinant viruses. This same
difference in transcript abundance was seen when a reporter gene
(beta-galactosidase) was controlled by the two promoters in recombinant viruses
in the heterologous glycoprotein C (gC) locus. Thus, both the kinetics and
relative abundance of UL50 and UL37 transcripts are a direct function of their
respective promoter regulatory elements. Characterization of mutated UL37 and
UL50 promoters in recombinant viruses showed that the functional modules
important for expression from these promoters are concentrated upstream of the
transcription start site; however the extent and composition of these modules in 
terms of the cis-acting elements they contain was different for each. For the
UL37 promoter, both a HiNF-P factor binding site (-53 to -58 bp) and the TATA
homology (-22 to -27) were required for any detectable expression, while an Sp1
binding site at -123 augmented this but was not absolutely required. In contrast,
the only functional elements crucial for expression from the UL50 promoter were
the TATA box (-25 to -31) and an Sp1 binding site at -117 bp relative to the cap 
site. Despite differences in detail, when the functional architecture of these
two early promoters were compared to the extensively characterized HSV-1
thymidine kinase (UL23) promoter, class-specific similarities are clearly
apparent.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1998.9189 
PMID: 9657002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

