
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 17;273(29):18538-46.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) isoforms differentially activate simple versus complex
NFI-responsive promoters.

Chaudhry AZ(1), Vitullo AD, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106, USA.

Promoter-specific differences in the function of transcription factors play a
central role in the regulation of gene expression. We have measured the maximal
transcriptional activation potentials of nuclear factor I (NFI) proteins encoded 
by each of the four identified NFI genes (NFI-A, -B, -C, and -X) by transient
transfection in JEG-3 cells using two model NFI-dependent promoters: 1) a simple 
chimeric promoter containing a single NFI-binding site upstream of the adenovirus
major late promoter (NFI-Ad), and 2) the more complex mouse mammary tumor virus
long terminal repeat promoter. The relative activation potentials for the NFI
isoforms differed between the two promoters, with NFI-X being the strongest
activator of NFI-Ad and NFI-B being the strongest activator of the MMTV promoter.
To determine if these promoter-specific differences in activation potential were 
due to the presence of glucocorticoid response elements (GREs), we added GREs
upstream of the NFI-binding site in NFI-Ad. NFI-X remains the strongest activator
of the GRE containing simple promoter, indicating that differences in relative
activation potential are not due solely to the presence of GREs. Since NFI
proteins bind to DNA as dimers, we assessed the activation potentials of NFI
heterodimers. Here, we show that NFI heterodimers have intermediate activation
potentials compared with homodimers, demonstrating one potential mechanism by
which different NFI proteins can regulate gene expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.29.18538 
PMID: 9660824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

