
1. J Virol. 1998 Sep;72(9):7170-80.

NS1-Binding protein (NS1-BP): a novel human protein that interacts with the
influenza A virus nonstructural NS1 protein is relocalized in the nuclei of
infected cells.

Wolff T(1), O'Neill RE, Palese P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, 35037 Marburg, Germany. 
wolfft@mailer.uni-marburg.de

We used the yeast interaction trap system to identify a novel human 70-kDa
protein, termed NS1-binding protein (NS1-BP), which interacts with the
nonstructural NS1 protein of the influenza A virus. The genetic interaction was
confirmed by the specific coprecipitation of the NS1 protein from solution by a
glutathione S-transferase-NS1-BP fusion protein and glutathione-Sepharose. NS1-BP
contains an N-terminal BTB/POZ domain and five kelch-like tandem repeat elements 
of approximately 50 amino acids. In noninfected cells, affinity-purified
antibodies localized NS1-BP in nuclear regions enriched with the spliceosome
assembly factor SC35, suggesting an association of NS1-BP with the cellular
splicing apparatus. In influenza A virus-infected cells, NS1-BP relocalized
throughout the nucleoplasm and appeared distinct from the SC35 domains, which
suggests that NS1-BP function may be disturbed or altered. The addition of a
truncated NS1-BP mutant protein to a HeLa cell nuclear extract efficiently
inhibited pre-mRNA splicing but not spliceosome assembly. This result could be
explained by a possible dominant-negative effect of the NS1-BP mutant protein and
suggests a role of the wild-type NS1-BP in promoting pre-mRNA splicing. These
data suggest that the inhibition of splicing by the NS1 protein may be mediated
by binding to NS1-BP.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.9.7170-7180.1998 
PMCID: PMC109939
PMID: 9696811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

