
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):733-44.

The E6 oncoproteins of high-risk papillomaviruses bind to a novel putative GAP
protein, E6TP1, and target it for degradation.

Gao Q(1), Srinivasan S, Boyer SN, Wazer DE, Band V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, New England Medical Center, Tufts University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

The high-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are associated with carcinomas of the
cervix and other genital tumors. Previous studies have identified two viral
oncoproteins, E6 and E7, which are expressed in the majority of HPV-associated
carcinomas. The ability of high-risk HPV E6 protein to immortalize human mammary 
epithelial cells (MECs) has provided a single-gene model to study the mechanisms 
of E6-induced oncogenic transformation. In this system, the E6 protein targets
the p53 tumor suppressor protein for degradation, and mutational analyses have
shown that E6-induced degradation of p53 protein is required for MEC
immortalization. However, the inability of most dominant-negative p53 mutants to 
induce efficient immortalization of MECs suggests the existence of additional
targets of the HPV E6 oncoprotein. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we have
isolated a novel E6-binding protein. This polypeptide, designated E6TP1
(E6-targeted protein 1), exhibits high homology to GTPase-activating proteins for
Rap, including SPA-1, tuberin, and Rap1GAP. The mRNA for E6TP1 is widely
expressed in tissues and in vitro-cultured cell lines. The gene for E6TP1
localizes to chromosome 14q23.2-14q24.3 within a locus that has been shown to
undergo loss of heterozygosity in malignant meningiomas. Importantly, E6TP1 is
targeted for degradation by the high-risk but not the low-risk HPV E6 proteins
both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, the immortalization-competent but not the
immortalization-incompetent HPV16 E6 mutants target the E6TP1 protein for
degradation. Our results identify a novel target for the E6 oncoprotein and
provide a potential link between HPV E6 oncogenesis and alteration of a small G
protein signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.19.1.733 
PMCID: PMC83930
PMID: 9858596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

