
1. Virus Res. 1998 Nov;58(1-2):73-82.

Identification and characterization of a JC virus pentanucleotide repeat element 
binding protein: cellular nucleic acid binding protein.

Liu M(1), Kumar KU, Pater MM, Pater A.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of
Newfoundland, St. John's, Canada.

The JC virus (JCV) control region contains AGGGAAGGGA, the tandem pentanucleotide
repeat element (Pnt2). Several proteins specifically interacted via Pnt2 to
regulate the expression of JCV early promoter-enhancer (JCV(E)) or late
promoter-enhancer (JCV(L)). In this study, a JCV Pnt2 oligonucleotide probe was
used to screen a cDNA expression library from glial P19 mouse embryonal carcinoma
cells. A cDNA clone was isolated by Southwestern blot assay and it produced a
protein that reproducibly and specifically bound to Pnt2. This cDNA had 100%
homology to one of three previously identified mouse cDNAs called cellular
nucleic acid binding proteins (Cnbps). Cnbps are a highly homologous family of
eukaryotic genes implicated in functional interactions with cytoplasmic RNA and
regulatory DNA elements. An mRNA of 2.2 kb of Pnt2-interacting Cnbp (PCnbp) was
seen in undifferentiated, muscle or glial P19 cells. When expressed from a cDNA
expression vector as a fusion protein that also contained 115 kDa from
beta-galactosidase, a Pnt2 binding protein (PCNBP) specifically bound to Pnt2 in 
Southwestern blots as a 30 kDa component of the 145 kDa fusion protein.
Furthermore, JCV(E) expression was negatively regulated by PCnbp produced in vivo
from the cDNA expression vector. Regulation of JCV(L) was unaffected. We suggest 
a novel role for CNBP as a PCNBP that interacts with Pnt2 in the negative
transcriptional regulation of JCV(E).

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-1702(98)00108-7 
PMID: 9879764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

