
1. J Virol. 1999 Feb;73(2):1350-61.

Interactions of the cytoplasmic domains of human and simian retroviral
transmembrane proteins with components of the clathrin adaptor complexes modulate
intracellular and cell surface expression of envelope glycoproteins.

Berlioz-Torrent C(1), Shacklett BL, Erdtmann L, Delamarre L, Bouchaert I, Sonigo 
P, Dokhelar MC, Benarous R.

Author information: 
(1)CJF 97/03 INSERM, Interactions Moléculaires, Hôte-Pathogène, Institut Cochin
de Génétique Moléculaire, 75014 Paris, France.

The cytoplasmic domains of the transmembrane (TM) envelope proteins (TM-CDs) of
most retroviruses have a Tyr-based motif, YXXO, in their membrane-proximal
regions. This signal is involved in the trafficking and endocytosis of membrane
receptors via clathrin-associated AP-1 and AP-2 adaptor complexes. We have used
CD8-TM-CD chimeras to investigate the role of the Tyr-based motif of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV), and
human T-leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) TM-CDs in the cell surface expression of
the envelope glycoprotein. Flow cytometry and confocal microscopy studies showed 
that this motif is a major determinant of the cell surface expression of the
CD8-HTLV chimera. The YXXO motif also plays a key role in subcellular
distribution of the envelope of lentiviruses HIV-1 and SIV. However, these
viruses, which encode TM proteins with a long cytoplasmic domain, have additional
determinants distal to the YXXO motif that participate in regulating cell surface
expression. We have also used the yeast two-hybrid system and in vitro binding
assays to demonstrate that all three retroviral YXXO motifs interact with the
micro1 and micro2 subunits of AP complexes and that the C-terminal regions of
HIV-1 and SIV TM proteins interact with the beta2 adaptin subunit. The TM-CDs of 
HTLV-1, HIV-1, and SIV also interact with the whole AP complexes. These results
clearly demonstrate that the cell surface expression of retroviral envelope
glycoproteins is governed by interactions with adaptor complexes. The YXXO-based 
signal is the major determinant of this interaction for the HTLV-1 TM, which
contains a short cytoplasmic domain, whereas the lentiviruses HIV-1 and SIV have 
additional determinants distal to this signal that are also involved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.2.1350-1361.1999 
PMCID: PMC103959
PMID: 9882340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

