
1. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 14;18(2):449-58.

Adenovirus early region 1A protein binds to mammalian SUG1-a regulatory component
of the proteasome.

Grand RJ(1), Turnell AS, Mason GG, Wang W, Milner AE, Mymryk JS, Rookes SM,
Rivett AJ, Gallimore PH.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Institute for Cancer Studies, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, UK.

Adenovirus early region 1A (Ad E1A) is a multifunctional protein which is
essential for adenovirus-mediated transformation and oncogenesis. Whilst E1A is
generally considered to exert its influence on recipient cells through regulation
of transcription it also increases the level of cellular p53 by increasing the
protein half-life. With this in view, we have investigated the relationship of Ad
E1A to the proteasome, which is normally responsible for degradation of p53. Here
we have shown that both Ad5 and Ad12 E1A 12S and 13S proteins can be
co-immunoprecipitated with proteasomes and that the larger Ad12 E1A protein binds
strongly to at least three components of the 26S but not 20S proteasome. One of
these interacting species has been identified as mammalian SUGI, a proteasome
regulatory component which also plays a role in the cell as a mediator of
transcription. In vitro assays have demonstrated a direct interaction between
Ad12 E1A 13S protein and mouse SUGI. Following infection of human cells with Ad5 
wt and Ad5 mutants with lesions in the E1A gene it has been shown that human SUG1
can be co-immunoprecipitated with full-length E1A and with E1A carrying a
deletion in conserved region 1 which is the region considered to be responsible
for increased expression of p53. We have concluded therefore that Ad EIA binds
strongly to SUGI but that this interaction is not responsible for inhibition of
proteasome activity. This is consistent with the observation that purified Ad12
E1A inhibits the activity of the purified 20S but not 26S proteasomes. We have
also demonstrated that SUGI can be co-immunoprecipitated with SV40 T and
therefore we suggest that this may represent a common interaction of transforming
proteins of DNA tumour viruses.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202304 
PMID: 9927201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

